Table of Contents
Expand
Table of Contents

National Debt: GOP vs Dems
Presidential Impact
2024 Economic Plans
Presidents: Highest Debt
The Bottom Line

Visions of America / Universal Images Group / Getty Images

Close

Key Takeaways
The national debt exceeded $38 trillion in February 2026, as the federal government's debt continues to grow.Republican presidents have added slightly more to the national debt per term than Democratic presidents.Republican presidents added about $1.4 trillion per four-year term, compared to $1.2 trillion added by Democrats since 1913.

Investopedia Answers

ASK

National debt refers to how much the U.S. federal government owes its creditors. Most of this debt is held by the American public, followed by foreign governments, U.S. banks, and other investors. The government's money comes from taxes on personal and corporate income, payroll earnings, and borrowing. This money is spent on programs like Social Security, education, healthcare, and defense.

The national debt exceeded $38.56 trillion in February 2026, as the combined debt held by the U.S. public and the federal government grows. The U.S. national debt is approximately equal to the value of the economies of China, Germany, Japan, India, and the U.K. combined, the Peter G. Peterson Foundation found.

But which political party has historically added more to the national debt—Democrats or Republicans? The answer depends on how you slice the data.

Republican Presidents Have Added More to the National Debt Per Term—But Democratic Presidents Added More Debt Overall

Inflation-adjusted data from the U.S. Treasury Department and the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) would suggest that Republican presidents have added slightly more debt to the U.S. national debt than Democratic presidents per term. Republican presidents added about $1.4 trillion per four-year term, compared to $1.2 trillion added by Democrats from 1913 to the end of fiscal 2024.

However, Democratic presidents added more inflation-adjusted debt overall. That could be because Democratic presidents were in power for nine more years than Republican presidents in the period since 1913. Democratic presidents have added a total of $18 trillion to the national debt since 1913 (adjusted for inflation), while Republicans have added $17.3 trillion.

How Does a President and Their Administration Affect Debt?

The way a president has historically responded to major events has added significantly to the national debt. Funding wars and spending on government relief during recessions have led presidents to add to the national debt.

While national debt isn’t entirely in their control, a president and their administration’s fiscal policies impact it. Federal spending can be out of a president’s control during war, natural disasters, or a public health crisis.

During the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, President Donald Trump signed the $2.2 trillion CARES Act stimulus bill into law in response to the sharp rise in unemployment during the pandemic. Later, President Joe Biden signed the $1.9 trillion American Rescue Plan Act to further help Americans and businesses as they continued to recover from the pandemic.

President Barack Obama signed the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) in 2009 when the economy went through the worst recession since the Great Depression. Former President George W. Bush added significantly to the national debt during his term after invading Afghanistan and to fund the War on Terror following the Sept. 11 terror attacks. The Iraq and Afghanistan wars cost an estimated $8 trillion over 20 years, ending in 2021.

How Would the 2024 Election Candidates’ Economic Plans Affect U.S. National Debt?
The national debt was also a leading issue during the 2024 presidential election. Data from a Peterson Foundation poll found that more than nine in 10 voters across seven key swing states said it was important for candidates to have a plan for national debt.

However, a report by the nonpartisan Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget (CRFB) found that both candidates were likely to significantly increase the national debt under their current spending plans. High levels of national debt can slow down the economy, increase interest rates, and generally increase the risk of a fiscal crisis.

Tallying what economic proposals the candidates had made, Democratic presidential nominee Kamala Harris’ spending plan would have increased the national debt by about $3.95 trillion through 2035, while Trump’s plan would increase the debt by $7.75 trillion, according to an estimate by the CRFB.

Which President Added the Most National Debt Per Term?
Former President Trump added the most national debt per term, to the tune of about $7.1 trillion in additional debt during his term from 2016 to 2020.

The Bottom Line
Since 1913, Republican presidents have added slightly more debt to the U.S. national debt than Democratic presidents per four-year term. However, Democratic presidents added more inflation-adjusted debt overall, though there have also been nine more years of Democratic presidents since 1913 compared to Republican presidents.

Article Sources

Investopedia requires writers to use primary sources to support their work. These include white papers, government data, original reporting, and interviews with industry experts. We also reference original research from other reputable publishers where appropriate. You can learn more about the standards we follow in producing accurate, unbiased content in our
editorial policy.

Federal Reserve of St. Louis. “Who Holds U.S. National Debt?”
Fiscal Data. "Debt to the Penny."
Peter G. Peterson Foundation. "The National Debt Is Now More Than $38 Trillion. What Does That Mean?"
Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget. "What’s in the $2 Trillion Coronavirus Relief Package?"
U.S. National Archives. “American Rescue Plan.”
Brown University. "Costs of the 20-Year War on Terror: $8 Trillion and 900,000 Deaths."
Peter G. Peterson Foundation. "New Battleground Poll: National Debt A Critical Issue For Swing State Voters."
Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget. "CBO Outlines Negative Implications of High & Rising National Debt."
Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget. "The Fiscal Impact of the Harris and Trump Campaign Plans."

Read more
Economy
Government & Policy
Partner Links

Related Articles

What Was in Biden's American Families Plan?

U.S. Export Restrictions: What Are They, and How Do They Work?

Universal Market Integrity Rules (UMIR) in Canada: Key Insights

China’s Banking System: Evolution, Reforms, and Global Integration

Understanding the Federal-State Unemployment Compensation Program

These Are The Best Countries for Digital Nomads

Understanding the Kazakhstan National Fund: Key Insights and Functionality

How Are Police Departments Funded?

Understanding the Committee on Foreign Investment in the U.S. (CFIUS)

Lisbon Treaty Explained: Impact, History, and Key Changes

Understanding Quebec's Parental Insurance Plan (PPIP) Benefits

Pros and Cons of National Lotteries: Impact on Education and Society

What Does the U.S. Secretary of Labor Do?

Understanding Canada's Principal Private Residence Rules

Public-Private Investment Program (PPIP): Stabilizing Finance Post-Crisis

Federal Insurance Office (FIO): Overview and Impact Post-Financial Crisis
