NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

POLITICAL CYCLES AND STOCK RETURNS

Lubos Pastor
Pietro Veronesi

Working Paper 23184
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23184

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
February 2017, Revised May 2019

The views in this paper are the responsibility of the authors, not the institutions with which they
are affiliated, nor the National Bureau of Economic Research. For helpful comments, we are
grateful to our conference discussants Daniel Andrei, Frederico Belo, Ian Dew-Becker, Alex
Michaelides, Anna Pavlova, Ross Valkanov, and Mungo Wilson, as well as to Peter Buisseret,
Wioletta Dziuda, Vito Gala, Marcin Kacperczyk, Ali Lazrak, Pedro Santa-Clara, Rob Stambaugh,
Lucian Taylor, Francesco Trebbi, Harald Uhlig, Jan Zabojnik, conference participants at the
Adam Smith Workshop, American Finance Association, Citrus Finance Conference, ESSFM
Gerzensee, European Finance Association, Jackson Hole Finance Conference, Minnesota Macro-
Asset Pricing Conference, MIT Capital Markets Research Workshop, Political Economy of
Finance conference, Red Rock Finance conference, and seminar audiences at The Einaudi
Institute for Economics and Finance, Imperial College, Rice University, University of British
Columbia, University of Chicago (both Booth and Harris schools), University of Houston,
University of Matej Bel, University of Michigan, University of Pennsylvania, University of Texas
at Austin, WU Vienna, and the National Bank of Slovakia. We are also grateful to Will Cassidy,
Bianca He, and Pierre Jaffard for excellent research assistance and to the Fama-Miller Center for
Research in Finance and the Center for Research in Security Prices, both at Chicago Booth, for
research support.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Lubos Pastor and Pietro Veronesi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Political Cycles and Stock Returns
Lubos Pastor and Pietro Veronesi
NBER Working Paper No. 23184
February 2017, Revised May 2019
JEL No. D72,G12,G18,P16

ABSTRACT

We develop a model of political cycles driven by time-varying risk aversion. Agents choose to
work in the public or private sector and to vote Democrat or Republican. In equilibrium, when
risk aversion is high, agents elect Democrats—the party promising more redistribution. The
model predicts higher average stock market returns under Democratic presidencies, explaining
the well-known “presidential puzzle.” The model can also explain why economic growth has
been faster under Democratic presidencies. In the data, Democratic voters are more risk- averse
and risk aversion declines during Democratic presidencies. Public workers vote Democrat while
entrepreneurs vote Republican, as the model predicts.

Lubos Pastor
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
lubos.pastor@chicagobooth.edu

Pietro Veronesi
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
pietro.veronesi@chicagobooth.edu

1.

Introduction

Stock market returns in the United States exhibit a striking pattern: they are much higher

under Democratic presidents than under Republican ones. From 1927 to 2015, the average

excess market return under Democratic presidents is 10.7% per year, whereas under Repub-

lican presidents, it is only −0.2% per year. The diﬀerence, almost 11% per year, is highly
signiﬁcant both economically and statistically. This fact is well known, having been carefully
documented by Santa-Clara and Valkanov (2003).1 However, the source of this return gap
is unclear. After ruling out various potential explanations, most notably diﬀerences in risk,

Santa-Clara and Valkanov dub this phenomenon the “presidential puzzle.”

Many ﬁnancial market anomalies are coincidences that can be attributed to data mining.

Such anomalies tend to vanish out of sample. The presidential puzzle, however, survives an
out-of-sample assessment. In the 1927–1998 period analyzed by Santa-Clara and Valkanov,

the Democrat-Republican return gap is 9.4% per year. In 1999 through 2015, the gap is even

larger at 17.4% per year. There seems to be a genuine fact to explain.

It might be tempting to oﬀer explanations based on diﬀerent economic policies of the two

parties. Perhaps Democratic policies are good for the stock market, or Republican policies

are bad. However, such explanations would require a large amount of market irrationality.

Investors would have to repeatedly misprice stocks by failing to anticipate such policy eﬀects.
We propose a simpler explanation that does not involve irrational behavior.

Our explanation emphasizes the endogeneity of election outcomes. We argue that the
return gap is not explained by what presidents do, but rather by when they get elected.

Democrats tend to get elected when expected future returns are high; Republicans win when

expected returns are low. To generate rational time variation in expected returns, we rely

on time variation in risk aversion. The idea of time-varying risk aversion is widely accepted
in ﬁnancial economics as a way of understanding the observed time variation in risk premia

(e.g., Campbell and Cochrane, 1999). When risk aversion is high, investors demand high

compensation for risk, which they earn in the form of high average future returns.

We develop a model of political cycles that gives rise to the following story, in which the

presidential puzzle emerges endogenously. When risk aversion is high, as during economic

crises, voters are more likely to elect a Democratic president because they demand more social
insurance. When risk aversion is low, voters are more likely to elect a Republican because

1Prior to Santa-Clara and Valkanov (2003), this fact was reported by several studies in practitioner
journals, such as Huang (1985) and Hensel and Ziemba (1995). To simplify the exposition, we attribute the
ﬁnding to Santa-Clara and Valkanov whose analysis is more formal and comprehensive.

1

they want to take more business risk. Therefore, risk aversion is higher under Democrats,

resulting in a higher equity risk premium, and thus a higher average return. In our model,

the high risk premium is not caused by the Democratic presidency; instead, both the risk
premium and the Democratic presidency are caused by high risk aversion.

Our model features agents with heterogeneous skill and time-varying risk aversion. The
agents make two decisions: they choose an occupation and vote in an election. There are

two occupations and two political parties. For their occupation, each agent can be either

an entrepreneur or a government worker. Entrepreneurs are risk-takers whose income is

increasing in skill and subject to taxation. Government workers support entrepreneurial
activity and live oﬀ taxes paid by entrepreneurs. In the election, agents choose between two

political parties, a high- and a low-tax one. The high-tax party, if elected, imposes a high

ﬂat tax rate on entrepreneurs’ income; the low-tax party imposes a low rate. Under either

party, the government balances its budget. The election is decided by the median voter.

In equilibrium, entrepreneurs vote for the low-tax party while government workers vote

for the high-tax party. The low-tax party thus wins the election if more than half of all

agents are entrepreneurs. Agents become entrepreneurs if their skill is suﬃciently high. The
mass of entrepreneurs is larger under the low-tax party than under the high-tax one.

Time-varying risk aversion shapes election outcomes by aﬀecting agents’ occupational
choice, which in turn aﬀects their electoral choice. Higher risk aversion makes entrepreneur-

ship less attractive because agents dislike the risk associated with entrepreneurship. When

risk aversion is high, more agents prefer the safe income from the government over the risky

income from business ownership. An increase in risk aversion thus shrinks the ranks of en-
trepreneurs, raising the likelihood of the high-tax party getting elected. Loosely speaking,

when agents are more risk-averse, they demand a stronger safety net, which the high-tax

party does a better job providing through larger ﬁscal redistribution.

When risk aversion is high enough, the economy has a unique equilibrium in which less

than half of all agents become entrepreneurs and the high-tax party wins the election. When

risk aversion is low enough, there is a unique equilibrium in which the low-tax party wins.
When risk aversion is in between, either party can win, and which of the two “sunspot”

equilibria we end up in is impossible to predict within the model.

Risk aversion connects the party in oﬃce to stock returns. Since high risk aversion

gets the high-tax party elected, risk aversion is higher while the high-tax party—which we

interpret as Democrats—is in oﬃce. The higher risk aversion translates into a higher risk

premium under Democrats, generating the presidential puzzle inside the model.

2

Are Democrats more likely to get elected when risk aversion is high? Risk aversion tends

to rise in times of economic turmoil (e.g., Guiso et al., 2016), and during such periods, high-

tax parties tend to get elected. Broz (2013) examines bank crises in developed countries
and ﬁnds that left-wing governments are more likely to be elected after ﬁnancial crashes.

Wright (2012) shows that U.S. voters tend to elect Democrats when unemployment is high.

The two biggest ﬁnancial crises over the past century also ﬁt the bill. In November 1932,

during the Great Depression, the incumbent Republican president Herbert Hoover lost the
election to Democrat Franklin Roosevelt. In November 2008, at the peak of the ﬁnancial

crisis, Republican George W. Bush was replaced by Democrat Barack Obama. Roosevelt and

Obama are not the only Democratic presidents elected during or shortly after recessions. For

example, Kennedy was elected during the 1960-61 recession, Carter shortly after the 1973-75
recession, and Clinton shortly after the 1990-91 recession. We argue this is not a coincidence.

When the economy is weak, risk aversion rises, contributing to a Democrat victory.

We also provide direct evidence connecting risk aversion to voter preferences. In the time

series, four diﬀerent proxies for risk aversion tend to decline over the course of a Democratic

presidency, consistent with the model. In the cross section, more risk-averse Americans tend

to vote Democrat while less risk-averse ones vote Republican, consistent with the idea that
more risk-averse individuals avoid business risk but demand social insurance. In the same

survey data, we also ﬁnd that government workers tend to vote Democrat while entrepreneurs

vote Republican, as the model predicts. We ﬁnd similar results for the UK, with the Labour

(Conservative) Party playing the role of the U.S. Democratic (Republican) Party.

Not only stock returns but also economic growth has been faster under Democrats. From

1930 to 2015, U.S. real GDP growth is 4.9% per year under Democratic presidents but

only 1.7% under Republican presidents. The diﬀerence, 3.2% per year, is signiﬁcant both
economically and statistically. A partisan growth gap has also been noted by Hibbs (1987),

Alesina and Sachs (1988), and Blinder and Watson (2016). Our model can explain this gap.

When risk aversion is high, the private sector is more productive because only high-skilled

agents become entrepreneurs. The public sector contributes to growth by leveraging the
If the contribution is suﬃciently strong, the model implies
private sector’s productivity.

faster growth under high risk aversion, which is when Democrats are in power.

Political cycles arise naturally in our model. When the economy is weak, risk aversion

is high, helping Democrats win the election. Under Democrats, growth is higher, leading

to lower risk aversion, which helps Republicans win the next election. Under Republicans,

growth is lower, leading to higher risk aversion, which helps Democrats win, etc.

3

This paper expands the intersection of ﬁnance and political economy. To ﬁnance, we

contribute the ﬁrst model of political cycles. To political economy, we add a new mechanism

that generates such cycles, along with novel implications for asset prices. To both literatures,
we add a rational explanation for the presidential puzzle in stock returns.

In the earliest economic models of political cycles, beginning with Nordhaus (1975),
the sole objective of political parties is to win elections. In these “opportunistic” models,

all parties adopt the same policy in an eﬀort to capture the median voter (Downs, 1957).

These models cannot explain diﬀerences between Democratic and Republican administra-

tions. “Partisan” models, originating with Hibbs (1977), assume that parties have diﬀerent
policy preferences, which translate into diﬀerent policy platforms. We develop a new parti-

san model with strong asset pricing implications. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst model

making predictions for the behavior of stock prices under diﬀerent administrations.

In the traditional partisan view (e.g., Hibbs, 1977, 1987, and Alesina, 1987), Democrats

prioritize growth over inﬂation while Republicans do the opposite. In contrast, we emphasize

the parties’ diﬀerent preferences over ﬁscal redistribution. We think of Democrats as the

“high-tax” party and Republicans as the “low-tax” party. While these labels are simplistic,
they have some empirical support. Across U.S. states, state tax burdens are higher when

the state legislature is controlled by Democrats (Reed, 2006). Across developed countries,

left-wing governments are associated with an expansion of government revenue (Cameron,
1978, Tavares, 2004, Potrafke, 2017a).2 We show that the U.S. federal tax/GDP ratio tends
to rise under Democratic presidents and fall under Republican presidents.

Our focus on tax policy is not the only diﬀerence between our model and traditional
partisan models. In those models, agents have preferences over policies; in our model, they

have preferences over consumption. In traditional models, parties optimize over policies; in
ours, policies are taken as given, for simplicity.3 We let agents make not only electoral but also
occupational choices; as a result, the occupation of the median voter changes endogenously.
We allow risk aversion to vary over time, resulting in time variation in policy preferences.

These novel modeling features are crucial in generating our asset pricing predictions.

A large literature is devoted to tests of political cycle models (see surveys by Drazen,

2Cameron (1978) argues that the U.S. “Democratic party is not considered to be leftist” by international

standards, but adds that “it is, of course, true that the party is to the left of the Republican party.”

3A richer model could attempt to endogenize the tax rates as equilibrium outcomes of the parties’ policy
decisions. If the two competing parties were purely opportunistic, caring only about winning the election,
they would converge to the same tax rate preferred by the median voter. But if the two parties care also
about the actual policy, convergence is only partial, resulting in two diﬀerent platform tax rates, as assumed
here. For a detailed discussion of partial convergence, see, for example, Alesina and Rosenthal (1995).

4

2000a, and Dubois, 2016). Given their assumption that Democrats prioritize growth over

inﬂation, partisan models can explain faster economic growth under Democrats, but their

prediction of higher inﬂation under Democrats is less successful empirically (e.g., Drazen,
2000b, Potrafke, 2017b). Moreover, they cannot explain the presidential puzzle in stock

returns. Our model can, and it can also explain faster growth under Democrats.

In ﬁnance, our paper is related not only to the literature on the presidential puzzle, cited

earlier, but also to studies analyzing the market response to electoral outcomes. It is well

known that the stock market tends to respond more favorably to the election of a Republican
president.4 This evidence is in line with our model: the election of a low-tax party is good
news for shareholders because lower taxes imply higher after-tax cash ﬂows. This eﬀect is

nontrivial, 2–3% per election (Snowberg et al., 2007), but the presidential puzzle is much

larger: almost 11% per year, or over 40% per four-year presidential term. This paper is also

related to Belo et al. (2013), who relate political cycles to the cross-section of stock returns,
Belo and Yu (2013), who link government investment to risk premia, Koijen, Philipson,

and Uhlig (2016), who ﬁnd government risk embedded in health care stock prices, Knight

(2006), who analyzes the extent to which policy platforms are capitalized into stock prices,
and the literature on political uncertainty.5 Our model is signiﬁcantly richer than P´astor and
Veronesi (2016) as we add two key features: electoral choice and time-varying risk aversion.

Moreover, while their focus is on income inequality, ours is on political cycles.

2. Model

There is a sequence of electoral periods indexed by t. At the beginning of each period, a
continuum of agents with unit mass is born. These agents immediately choose an occupation

and elect a government. At the end of the period, agents consume and die.

Agents have identical preferences over end-of-period consumption:

Ut (Ci,t+1) =

(Ci,t+1)1−γt
1 − γt

,

(1)

where Ci,t+1 is agent i’s consumption at the end of period t and γt > 0 is the coeﬃcient of
relative risk aversion. Note that risk aversion γt varies over time but not across agents.

Agents are heterogeneous in entrepreneurial skill. Agent i is endowed with a skill level

4See, for example, Niederhoﬀer et al. (1970), Riley and Luksetich (1980), and Snowberg et al. (2007).
5See, for example, P´astor and Veronesi (2012, 2013), Boutchkova et al. (2012), Julio and Yook (2012),

Baker et al. (2016), Fern´andez-Villaverde et al. (2015), and Kelly et al. (2016).

5

µi, which is randomly drawn from a normal distribution:6

µi ∼ N (cid:0)0, σ2

µ

(cid:1) .

(2)

Agents with higher skill produce more output if they become entrepreneurs.

Each agent is endowed with one unit of human capital. Agents choose whether to deploy
this capital in the private or public sector. Speciﬁcally, each agent chooses one of two

occupations: entrepreneur or government worker. Entrepreneurs produce output and pay

taxes; government workers support entrepreneurial activity and consume taxes.

If agent i chooses to become an entrepreneur, he invests his capital in a private agent-

speciﬁc technology that produces output equal to

Yi,t+1 = eµi + εt+1 + εi,t+1 Gt ,

(3)

where εt+1 is an aggregate shock, εi,t+1 is an idiosyncratic shock, and Gt is the government’s
contribution. All shocks are i.i.d. normal: εt+1 ∼ N (− 1
1), so
that E(eεt+1) = E(eεi,t+1) = 1. All εi,t+1 are i.i.d. across agents. The investment is made at
the beginning of period t. The shocks are realized—and output Yi,t+1 produced—at the end
of period t, just before a new generation of agents is born. Each entrepreneur owns a ﬁrm
producing a liquidating dividend of Yi,t+1(1 − τt), where τt is the tax rate. The entrepreneur
can sell a fraction of his ﬁrm to other entrepreneurs and use the proceeds from the sale to
purchase two kinds of ﬁnancial assets: shares in the ﬁrms of other entrepreneurs and risk-free

2 σ2, σ2) and εi,t+1 ∼ N (− 1

1, σ2

2σ2

bonds. The bonds mature at the end of period t and are in zero net supply. Each entrepreneur

faces a constraint inspired by moral hazard considerations: he must retain ownership of at

least a fraction θ of his own ﬁrm. Due to this friction, markets are incomplete.

If agent i becomes a government worker, she contributes to production indirectly, by

supporting entrepreneurs.
In practice, governments support business in many ways: by
maintaining law and order, building roads, providing education, supporting research, etc. We
summarize all this support in the term Gt.7 This term enters equation (3) in a multiplicative
fashion, indicating that government makes all entrepreneurs more productive. We do not
make any assumptions about Gt, other than it is positive and ﬁnite, until Section 2.3.
Each government worker consumes an equal share of the tax revenue paid by entrepreneurs.

Government workers cannot sell claims to their future tax-ﬁnanced income.

Since the model features only two types of agents, the types must be interpreted broadly.

In a realistic system of ﬁscal redistribution, we think of entrepreneurs as net contributors,

6Without loss of generality, we set the mean of this distribution to zero, to simplify the algebraic presen-

tation. None of our conclusions rely on the zero mean, though (see the Online Appendix).

7Barro (1990) seems to be the ﬁrst to include government as an input in a private production function.

6

or net tax payers, and government workers as net beneﬁciaries, or net tax recipients. For

example, we think of government workers as not only government employees but also retirees

living oﬀ Social Security, people on disability or unemployment beneﬁts, etc.

In the election, agents choose between two political parties, H (high-tax) and L (low-

tax). The two parties diﬀer in a single dimension: the tax rate they levy on entrepreneurs’
income.8 We denote the tax rates levied by parties H and L by τ H and τ L, respectively,
where τ H > τ L. We take the two tax rates as given and assume that the parties implement
those rates if elected.9 Under either party, the tax proceeds are redistributed to government
workers, so that the government always runs a balanced budget. The election is decided by
the median voter. The key events in the model are summarized in Figure 1.

2.1. Equilibrium

At the beginning of each period, agents make two simultaneous choices: they select an

occupation and elect a party. We solve for a Nash equilibrium in which each agent maximizes

the expected utility in equation (1) while taking all other agents’ choices as given. We ﬁrst
show how agents vote while taking occupational choices as given (Section 2.1.1), then how

agents choose their occupations while taking electoral choices as given (Section 2.1.2), and

ﬁnally, we examine the equilibrium outcomes (Section 2.1.3).

Let It denote the set of agents who choose to become entrepreneurs at the beginning
of period t. The equilibrium mass of entrepreneurs is then mt = (cid:82)
di and the mass
In equilibrium, It includes all agents whose expected
of government workers is 1 − mt.
utility from being an entrepreneur exceeds that from being a government worker. Since
each agent’s utility depends on It, obtaining the equilibrium involves solving a ﬁxed-point
problem. Below, we present only the results. All proofs are in the Online Appendix.

i∈It

2.1.1. Electoral Choice

We assume that each agent votes for the party whose election would maximize the agent’s
utility. This “truthful voting” assumption seems reasonable because, due to their inﬁnitesi-

mal size, agents cannot aﬀect the election outcome through strategic voting.

8The simplifying assumption of single-dimensional party platforms is common in the literature. For

example, Alesina and Rosenthal (1995) assume a one-dimensional policy model throughout their book.

9This assumption of no diﬀerence between the parties’ policy platforms and actual policies is often made

in theoretical models of political cycles (e.g., Rogoﬀ and Sibert, 1988).

7

Proposition 1. All entrepreneurs vote for party L and all government workers vote for
party H. Therefore, party L wins the election if and only if mt > 0.5.

Proposition 1 shows that agents’ electoral and occupational choices are closely connected.
The intuition is simple. Given It, the economy’s expected total output is ﬁxed. This output is
divided among government workers, who get a share equal to the tax rate, and entrepreneurs,
whose share is one minus the tax rate. Therefore, government workers vote for high taxes

while entrepreneurs vote for low taxes. More broadly, net beneﬁciaries of ﬁscal redistribution

vote Democrat while net contributors vote Republican.

Government workers consume tax revenue. This revenue depends on total output Yt+1,

(cid:90)

Yt+1 =

Yj,t+1 dj .

(4)

j∈It
For a given tax rate τt, total tax revenue is τtYt+1. Since this revenue is distributed equally
among 1 − mt government workers, the consumption of any given worker i is

Ci,t+1 =

τtYt+1
1 − mt

= τt

mt
1 − mt

Gt eεt+1 E [eµj |j ∈ It]

for all i /∈ It ,

(5)

where the second equality follows from equation (3). Given It, each government worker’s
consumption is proportional to τt. Each worker is thus better oﬀ choosing τ H over τ L.10

Entrepreneurs consume the proceeds of their investments. Entrepreneur i’s ﬁrm pays a
dividend Yi,t+1(1 − τt). The ﬁrm’s equilibrium market value at the beginning of period t is

Mi,t = Et [πt,t+1 Yi,t+1 (1 − τt)] ,

(6)

where πt,t+1 is the endogenous stochastic discount factor. To diversify, the entrepreneur sells
the fraction 1 − θ of his ﬁrm and uses the proceeds, (1 − θ) Mi,t, to buy shares in other ﬁrms
and risk-free bonds. Each entrepreneur chooses his portfolio by maximizing expected utility.
In equilibrium, each entrepreneur holds fraction θ of his portfolio in his own ﬁrm and 1 − θ

in the value-weighted aggregate stock market portfolio. There is no borrowing or lending

because risk aversion is equal across entrepreneurs. Entrepreneur i’s consumption is

Ci,t+1 = (1 − τt) Gt eµi+εt+1 [θeεi,t+1 + (1 − θ)]

for all i ∈ It .

(7)

This consumption increases in µi, indicating that more skilled entrepreneurs, whose ﬁrms
have higher market values, tend to consume more. Given It, each entrepreneur’s consumption
is proportional to 1 − τt. Entrepreneurs are thus clearly better oﬀ choosing τ L over τ H.

10Since government workers do not invest, they do not bear idiosyncratic risk. Yet their consumption
it depends on the aggregate shock εt+1. Given our balanced budget assumption, there is
is not risk-free:
no room for intertemporal smoothing by the government. When the economy suﬀers a negative shock, tax
revenue declines, and so does government workers’ consumption. Empirically, the wages of public employees
are indeed procyclical, though not as much as private sector wages (Quadrini and Trigari, 2007).

8

2.1.2. Occupational Choice

In this subsection, we analyze how agents choose to become entrepreneurs or government

workers, taking the electoral choice (i.e., the tax rate) as given.

Proposition 2. Assume that party k ∈ {H, L} is in power, so that the tax rate τ k is given.
Agent i becomes an entrepreneur if and only if

µi > µk
t

,

(8)

where µk
t

is the unique solution to

µk
t

= log

(cid:21)

(cid:20) τ k
1 − τ k

+ log





(cid:16)

1 − Φ
(cid:16)

Φ

; σ2

µk
t

µ, σ2
µ
(cid:17)

µk
t

; 0, σ2
µ

(cid:17)



 +

σ2
µ
2

−

log (cid:0)E (cid:8)[θeεi,t+1 + 1 − θ]1−γt(cid:9)(cid:1)
1 − γt

, (9)

and Φ (.; a, b) is the cdf of the normal distribution with mean a and variance b. The equilib-
rium mass of entrepreneurs, mk

, always satisﬁes 0 < mk

(cid:16)

(cid:17)

t = 1 − Φ

t < 1.

µk
t

; 0, σ2
µ

Equation (8) shows that only suﬃciently skilled agents become entrepreneurs. Agents
with lower skill become government workers. We emphasize that µi denotes entrepreneurial
skill, not general ability. An agent can be an extremely capable public school teacher, police

oﬃcer, or public oﬃcial while being imperfectly suited for entrepreneurship.

Corollary 1. The equilibrium mass of entrepreneurs mk
risk aversion γt, idiosyncratic volatility σ1, and the degree of market incompleteness θ.

t is decreasing in the tax rate τ k,

Corollary 1 identiﬁes four variables whose high values discourage entrepreneurship: a high

tax rate reduces entrepreneurs’ after-tax income; a high risk aversion means low willingness to
bear the idiosyncratic risk associated with entrepreneurship;11 a high idiosyncratic volatility
implies that entrepreneurial risk is large; and a high degree of market incompleteness means

that this risk cannot be diversiﬁed away. When the four variables take high values, only the

most skilled agents ﬁnd it worthwhile to become entrepreneurs.

2.1.3. Equilibrium Outcomes

The equilibrium outcomes crucially depend on risk aversion.

11In two special cases, risk aversion has no impact on entrepreneurship. When σ1 = 0, entrepreneurship
involves no idiosyncratic risk. When θ = 0, all idiosyncratic risk can be diversiﬁed away. But for σ1 > 0 and
θ > 0, a higher value of risk aversion implies a lower amount of entrepreneurship.

9

Proposition 3. There exist two thresholds γ < γ such that:

1. For γt > γ, there is a unique equilibrium: mt < 1

2. For γt < γ, there is a unique equilibrium: mt > 1

2 and party H wins the election
2 and party L wins the election

3. For γ < γt < γ, there are two pure-strategy Nash equilibria that can both be supported:

(a) If agents believe party H will win, then mt < 1
(b) If agents believe party L will win, then mt > 1

2 and H wins
2 and L wins

The formulas for the two thresholds, γ and γ, are presented in the Online Appendix.

This proposition shows that when risk aversion is high enough, the economy is in the

“H equilibrium” where taxes are high and the majority of agents work for the government.

When risk aversion is low enough, we are in the “L equilibrium” where taxes are low and

most agents are entrepreneurs. In between, either equilibrium is possible.

To understand Proposition 3, recall from Corollary 1 that the threshold µk
t
< µH
t

sition 2 is increasing in the tax rate τ k. Since τ L < τ H, we have µL
t
three types of agents. Agents with µi > µH
t
trepreneurship in both H and L equilibria. Agents with µi < µL
t
they choose government work in both equilibria. The third type are agents with

. There are
are “always-entrepreneurs”: they choose en-

are “never-entrepreneurs”:

from Propo-

µL
t

< µi < µH
t

.

(10)

These “intermediate-skill” agents choose a diﬀerent occupation depending on whether we

are in the H or L equilibrium. The three types of agents are illustrated in Figure 2.

and µH
t

Since both thresholds µL
t

are increasing in γt, a higher value of γt implies a smaller
mass of always-entrepreneurs and a larger mass of never-entrepreneurs. When γt > γ, the
mass of never-entrepreneurs exceeds 1
2 so that, given Proposition 1, we end up in the H
equilibrium. When γt < γ, the mass of always-entrepreneurs exceeds 1
2 and we end up in
the L equilibrium. When γ < γt < γ, the masses of both never-entrepreneurs and always-
entrepreneurs are smaller than 1
2 , so it is the intermediate-skill agents who decide which of
the two equilibria will be supported. Which equilibrium they pick cannot be determined
within the model. If they believe, for whatever reason, that the high-tax party is going to

win, then that party indeed wins. But if they believe the low-tax party is going to win, then

the low-tax party wins. See Figure 3 for an illustration of this sunspot equilibrium.

Given the indeterminacy of the equilibrium when γ < γt < γ, we need a rule for choosing
between H and L in such scenarios. For simplicity, we assume that this choice is completely

random, determined by the ﬂip of a fair coin.

10

2.2. Stock Returns

To calculate ﬁrm market values in equation (6), we need the equilibrium stochastic discount
factor πt,t+1. We obtain it from entrepreneurs’ ﬁrst-order conditions: πt,t+1 ∝ e−γtεt+1.
Interestingly, despite market incompleteness, πt,t+1 does not depend on idiosyncratic shocks,
εi,t+1, even though such shocks cannot be fully diversiﬁed away (for θ > 0). The reason is
that all agents have the same risk aversion and all ﬁrms the same risk exposure. As a result of

this symmetry, all entrepreneurs’ portfolios are symmetric—each entrepreneur holds fraction

θ of his wealth in his own ﬁrm and 1 − θ in the market portfolio—and only aggregate risk,
εt+1, is priced. This fact allows us to derive asset pricing results in closed form.12

The equilibrium market value of ﬁrm i at the beginning of period t is given by

Mi,t = (1 − τt) eµi−γtσ2Gt .

(11)

This expression is remarkably simple and intuitive. Firm value is increasing in both skill
and government contribution because both raise expected pre-tax dividends. Firm value is

decreasing in the tax rate because stockholders receive after-tax dividends. The value is also

decreasing in aggregate volatility and risk aversion because agents dislike risk.

We obtain a closed-form solution for the value of the aggregate stock market portfolio by

adding up the values from equation (11) across all entrepreneurs:

MP,t = (1 − τt) e−γtσ2E [eµj |j ∈ It] Gt mt ,

(12)

where the value of E [eµj |j ∈ It] is in the Online Appendix. The market portfolio is worth
MP,t at the beginning of period t and (1 − τt) Yt+1 at the end of period t. Computing the
ratio of these two values, we obtain the aggregate stock market return Rt+1 = eγtσ2+εt+1 − 1.
Recalling that E(eεt+1) = 1, we see that the expected stock market return is

Et (Rt+1) = eγtσ2 − 1 ≈ γtσ2 .

(13)

Proposition 4. Assume that γt ﬂuctuates suﬃciently so that at least one of the events
γt < γ and γt > γ occurs with nonzero probability, where γ and γ are from Proposition 3.
Expected stock market return is then higher under party H than under party L:

E (cid:0)Rt+1|τt = τ H(cid:1) > E (cid:0)Rt+1|τt = τ L(cid:1) .

(14)

Recall the three scenarios from Proposition 3: H, which occurs when γt > γ and in which
party H always wins the election; L, which occurs when γt < γ and in which party L always

12Many quantities in this section, such as τ k

t , γk

t , mk

t , and Gk

t , depend on the equilibrium k ∈ {H, L} that

the economy is in. We suppress the superscript k throughout to reduce notational clutter.

11

wins; and H/L, which occurs when γ < γt < γ and in which either party can win. Denote
the expected returns in the three scenarios by ERH, ERL, and ERH/L. From equation (13),

ERL < γσ2 < ERH/L < γσ2 < ERH .

(15)

While ERH is always earned under party H and ERL under party L, ERH/L can be earned
under either party with equal probability. Therefore, in the H/L scenario, expected returns

are the same under both parties. Averaging across all three scenarios, it follows that expected
return under party H is higher than under party L.

Proposition 4 summarizes our explanation of the presidential puzzle. As long as risk

aversion is suﬃciently volatile, expected market return under Democrats (party H) is higher
than under Republicans (party L), on average. This is a powerful result—what has been

viewed as a puzzle turns out to be a theorem in our model.

Expected stock returns in our model can be interpreted as risk premia, or returns in

excess of the risk-free rate, because that rate is eﬀectively zero. Since agents consume only

once, at the end of the period, there is no intertemporal consumption-saving decision that

would pin down the risk-free rate. We thus use the bond price as the numeraire.

The equity risk premium reﬂects the unpredictability of aggregate shocks (see equation

(13)). There is no premium for electoral uncertainty because stocks are claims on dividends
paid just before the next election. In our simple model, agents and their ﬁrms live for one

period. In a more complicated model in which ﬁrms’ lives span elections, electoral uncertainty

would command a risk premium (e.g., Kelly et al., 2016). Our conclusions would likely get

stronger because the impact of electoral uncertainty on stock prices would be larger under
party H when risk aversion is higher. In Section 2.5, we analyze the asset pricing implications

of electoral uncertainty diﬀerently—by considering a mixed Nash equilibrium.

2.3. Economic Growth

To calculate economic growth in period t, we divide total output at the end of the period,
Yt+1, by total capital invested at the beginning of the period. That capital is equal to one
because each agent is endowed with one unit of capital and the mass of agents is also one.
Therefore, economic growth in period t is simply equal to Yt+1. From equations (3) and (4),

Yt+1 = E (eµi|i ∈ It) mt Gt eεt+1 .

(16)

The ﬁrst term on the right-hand side, E (eµi|i ∈ It), is the average value of eµi across all
entrepreneurs. This term measures the average productivity of entrepreneurs, excluding the

12

government’s contribution. We refer to this term as private sector productivity.

Proposition 5. Private sector productivity is higher under party H than under party L:

E (cid:0)eµi|i ∈ It, τ = τ H(cid:1) > E (cid:0)eµi|i ∈ It, τ = τ L(cid:1) .

(17)

To understand this proposition, recall that in equilibrium k ∈ {H, L}, agent i is an
(Proposition 2). This threshold is

entrepreneur if his skill exceeds a threshold: µi > µk
t
higher under party H: µH
(Corollary 1). The average skill of entrepreneurs is thus
t
higher under party H, and so is the average value of eµi. The private sector is more productive
under party H due to the selection of more skilled agents into entrepreneurship.13

> µL
t

Proposition 5 shows that a key component of growth, private sector productivity, is higher

under party H than under party L. However, growth in equation (16) depends also on the
product of private investment mt and the government’s contribution Gt. Under party H, mt
is lower (Corollary 1) but Gt could be higher; therefore, mtGt could be higher or lower. How
mtGt compares between the H and L equilibria depends on the functional form for Gt.

The only assumptions we have made about Gt so far is that it is positive and bounded. We
now add the assumption that Gt is an increasing function of 1 − mt, the mass of government
workers. With more workers, the government can make a larger contribution to aggregate
output. The simplest increasing functional form is linear:

Gt = (1 − mt) eg .

(18)

The value of g can be interpreted as the average productivity of the public sector.

Given equation (18), mtGt is proportional to mt(1 − mt).

If the latter product takes

similar values under both H and L equilibria, then given Proposition 5, growth is faster
under party H. The product mt(1 − mt) is equal under both equilibria if the masses of
entrepreneurs under those equilibria, mH and mL, are symmetric around 1
2 :

mH + mL = 1 .

(19)

The symmetry of mt around 1
2 seems natural—it means that the margin of victory is the
same regardless of which party wins. For example, if mH = 0.48 and mL = 0.52, then the
margin is always 4%, whether the election is won by party H or L. In general, mH and mL

13A closely related selection eﬀect is emphasized by P´astor and Veronesi (2016). They also ﬁnd that OECD
countries with higher tax/GDP ratios tend to be more productive, as measured by GDP per hour worked.
Blinder and Watson (2016) ﬁnd that U.S. labor productivity and total factor productivity are both higher
under Democratic than Republican administrations, but the diﬀerence is not statistically signiﬁcant. Note
that private productivity in Proposition 5 excludes the government’s contribution Gt, unlike in the data.

13

depend on γt. For condition (19) to hold, the values of mH(γt) and mL(γt) must be spread
out symmetrically around 1
2. For example, suppose γt can take only two values, γH and γL,
which lead to unique equilibria H and L. Then there is only one value of mH(γH) and one
value of mL(γL). If these two values add up to one, condition (19) is satisﬁed.

Proposition 6. Under the linearity of Gt and symmetry of mt (conditions (18) and (19)),
the expected economic growth under party H is higher than under party L:

E (cid:0)Yt+1|τt = τ H(cid:1) > E (cid:0)Yt+1|τt = τ L(cid:1) .

(20)

The two assumptions in Proposition 6 are suﬃcient but not necessary. Any other assumptions
that keep mtGt similar under both parties would also deliver (20), thanks to Proposition 5.
For example, it is enough for the symmetry condition (19) to hold approximately.

The intuition behind Proposition 6 is that under party H, entrepreneurs are more skilled,

and even though there are fewer of them, their high productivity is leveraged by stronger

government support. For example, suppose voters kick out party L and elect party H.
The mass of entrepreneurs shrinks from mL > 1
2 , which is harmful to growth.
However, the entrepreneurs who quit are less skilled than those who stay. Moreover, the
smaller private sector is supported by a larger public sector (because 1 − mH > 1 − mL).
Under conditions (18) and (19), the net eﬀect is faster growth under party H.

2 to mH < 1

A key ingredient of Proposition 6 is that Gt enters the production function (3) in a
multiplicative fashion. The idea is that government contributes to output by leveraging the
productivity of the private sector. For example, one police oﬃcer contributes to the produc-

tive capacity of many businesses. If an agent abandons her business of selling sandwiches and

starts building roads, the economy suﬀers the loss of sandwiches, but it also gains because

many businesses beneﬁt from the common roads. Proposition 6 shows that intermediate-skill
agents contribute more to aggregate growth by supporting top-skill agents than by investing

on their own. The proposition holds under conditions (18) and (19), which ensure suﬃcient

complementarity between the public and private sectors.

Proposition 6 holds also under weaker conditions. For example, we could allow for “de-

creasing returns to scale” in the public sector, so that each additional government worker
contributes less to Gt. Speciﬁcally, we could replace condition (18) by Gt = (1 − mt)α eg, so
that Gt is concave in the mass of government workers when α < 1. The complementarity
between the public and private sectors is present for any α > 0. Condition (18) assumes
α = 1, but Proposition 6 holds more generally, when α is suﬃciently high.14

14Empirical studies generally ﬁnd complementarity between public and private capital (e.g., Anschauer

14

µ

2 ; 0, σ2

A social planner would choose mt that maximizes expected total output and redistribute
to maximize welfare. Under condition (18), the welfare-maximizing value of mt is m∗
t =
1 − Φ( σ2
µ) < 0.5. The social planner would thus assign fewer than half of agents, those
with the highest skill, to entrepreneurship, and the remaining majority to government work.
There are two opposing eﬀects. On the one hand, Gt reduces output by “crowding out”
private investment (higher 1 − mt implies lower mt). On the other hand, Gt raises output
by leveraging the private sector’s productivity. The latter eﬀect is stronger when mt > m∗
t ;
otherwise the former eﬀect prevails. The two eﬀects oﬀset each other when mt = m∗
t .

2.4. Endogenous Risk Aversion

All the results presented so far are very general, as they hold for risk aversion γt following any
exogenous process. We obtain further insights by specifying the evolution of γt. Evidence
suggests that risk aversion rises after negative economic shocks (e.g., Guiso et al., 2016).
We therefore endogenize γt by linking it to the state of the economy: γt = γ(Yt), which is
decreasing in Yt. That is, γt is high when the economy is weak (i.e., after low realizations of
output Yt at the end of the previous period), and vice versa.

Political cycles then arise naturally in the model. Suppose the economy is strong. Risk

aversion is low, so party L is more likely to win the next election (Proposition 3). Under

party L, economic growth is likely to be lower (Proposition 6), leading to higher risk aversion.
As a result, the following election is more likely to be won by party H. Under H, growth is

higher, leading to lower risk aversion and thus better electoral odds of party L. This cycle,

in which the two parties alternate in oﬃce, is summarized in Figure 4.

To formalize this result, we consider a special case of γ(Yt) in which the function takes

only two values, high or low, depending on the state of the economy:

γ(Yt) =

(cid:26) γH , where γH > γ ,
γL , where γL < γ ,

for yt < y
for yt > y

,

(21)

where yt = log (Yt) and y = E [yt] − 1
2σ2. We let λH,L denote the probability of an electoral
shift from party H to party L, and λL,H denote the probability of a reverse shift. In other
words, λk1,k2 is the probability of party k2 winning the election when party k1 is in power.

(1989) and Lynde and Richmond (1992)), but there is no consensus regarding the magnitude of the eﬀect. In
their meta-analysis of 68 studies, Bom and Ligthart (2014) ﬁnd that over 80% of the reported estimates of
the output elasticity of public capital are positive, but they range from -1.73 to 2.04. This range comfortably
includes many values of α for which Proposition 6 holds. We must be cautious in comparing these estimates
to α, though. Most empirical studies deﬁne public capital as the tangible capital stock owned by the public
sector whereas in our paper, public capital is 1 − mt, the human capital of government workers.

15

Proposition 7. Under the assumptions in equation (21) and Proposition 6,

λH,L = λL,H = Φ

(cid:18) E [yt+1|H] − E [yt+1|L]
2

(cid:19)

; 0, σ2

>

1
2

.

(22)

This proposition formalizes the formation of endogenous political cycles. When party

H is in power in period t, growth in period t tends to be faster, raising the likelihood of
yt+1 > y, in which case risk aversion jumps from γH to γL, which then results in a higher
probability of party L winning the election at the beginning of period t + 1. Under party L,
it is more likely that yt+2 < y, in which case risk aversion jumps from γL to γH, boosting
the electoral prospects of party H at the beginning of period t + 2, etc.

Interestingly, our model generates political cycles even in the absence of aggregate shocks.
When we eliminate the aggregate shock εt from equation (3) by letting its volatility σ2 → 0,
both λH,L and λL,H in equation (22) converge to one. In this limiting case, political cycles
are fully deterministic as the two parties alternate in oﬃce at each election.

The assumption that γt is fully driven by Yt establishes a tight link between political
cycles and business cycles. In reality, however, the link between γt and Yt is unlikely to be
perfect. Any variation in γt that is independent of Yt drives a wedge between business cycles
and political cycles. By adding such independent variation, our model can easily generate

return predictability above and beyond the business cycle.

To illustrate the formation of political cycles, we construct two numerical examples,
which we present in the Online Appendix. In the ﬁrst example, risk aversion γ(Yt) can take
two values, as in equation (21). In the second example, risk aversion can take three values,
covering all three scenarios considered in Proposition 3. Both examples show that the model

generates realistic political cycles, and that it has no trouble matching not only the sign but

also the magnitude of the observed Democrat-Republican return gap.

2.5. Announcement Eﬀects

Stock prices respond to the announcements of election outcomes, especially if those outcomes
are unexpected. To analyze such responses, we step away from the pure-strategy Nash

equilibria described in part 3 of Proposition 3.

In those equilibria, each agent takes the

choices of other agents as given, which precludes surprises about electoral outcomes. We
introduce such surprises by considering a mixed equilibrium for γt such that γ < γt < γ. To

16

keep things simple, we analyze a simple case in which γt can take three values:

γ(Yt) =






γH
γM
γL

for yt < y
for y ≤ yt ≤ y
for yt > y

,

(23)

where y < y and the thresholds from Proposition 3 satisfy γL < γ < γM < γ < γH.

Proposition 8. There exists γM ∈ (cid:2)γ, γ(cid:3) for which the economy is in a mixed equilibrium
with both parties H and L having the same probability of winning the election. In this equi-
librium, mt = 1

2 , and the median voter chooses the winning party randomly. In addition,

(a) The market reaction to the election is positive if party L wins but negative if H wins

(b) The risk premium for electoral uncertainty is positive.

Stock prices rise when party L is elected because a lower tax rate implies higher after-tax

dividends. Prices fall when H is elected because a higher tax rate means lower after-tax

dividends. These predictions are supported by the evidence cited in footnote 4, which shows
that the market responds more favorably to the election of a Republican president.

Agents require a risk premium for holding stocks during the electoral announcement. This
premium, which is equal to the expected value of the announcement return, compensates

stockholders for the uncertainty about which tax rate will prevail at the end of period t.

In the Online Appendix, we provide simple closed-form formulae for the party-speciﬁc
announcement returns, the electoral risk premium, and the value of γM that satisﬁes Propo-
sition 8. We also provide a numerical example showing that the model can deliver plausible

magnitudes of the announcement returns and the risk premium.

3. Empirical Analysis: Democrats vs Republicans

Our model makes only a few fundamental assumptions: Democrats redistribute more than

Republicans, risk aversion varies over time, skill varies across agents, and entrepreneurs are

under-diversiﬁed. From these plausible assumptions, and a few auxiliary ones, we derive a
rich set of predictions. We test those predictions empirically in this section.

17

3.1. Stock Market Performance

Our model predicts higher stock market returns under Democrats than under Republicans,

on average (Proposition 4). Santa-Clara and Valkanov (2003) compare average U.S. market

returns under Democratic and Republican presidents between years 1927 and 1998. We

extend their analysis through 2015. We construct a series of monthly excess stock market
returns by subtracting the log return on a three-month Treasury bill from the log return on
the value-weighted market return.15 We obtain both series from the Center for Research in
Security Prices, where they are available back to January 1927.

We construct a monthly time series of a Democrat dummy variable, D, which we deﬁne as

D = 1 if a Democratic president is in oﬃce and D = 0 otherwise. We handle transitions by

assuming that a president is in oﬃce until the end of the month in which his term ends. For

example, if a new president assumes oﬃce on January 20, we assign the month of January
to the old president and the month of February to the new president.16 We ﬁnd D = 1 in
52.5% of all months between January 1927 and December 2015, indicating that time in the

White House is split roughly equally between Democrats and Republicans. Figure 5 plots

average excess stock market returns for the 23 administrations between 1927 and 2015.

Table 1 compares market returns under Democratic and Republican presidents. In the full

sample period, the average excess stock market return is 10.69% per year under Democrats
but only -0.21% under Republicans. This is a striking result—all of the equity premium from

1927 through 2015 has been earned under a Democratic president! The Democrat-Republican

gap, 10.90% per year, is signiﬁcant both economically and statistically (t = 2.73). To assess

statistical signiﬁcance, we regress returns on D and compute the t-statistic for the slope
based on standard errors robust to both heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation.

When we split the sample into two equally long subperiods, we ﬁnd very similar results
in both of them: almost 11% per year under Democrats and -0.2% under Republicans. Even

in three equally long subperiods, the Democrat-Republican return gap is always positive,

ranging from 4.57% to 14.46% per year. Santa-Clara and Valkanov’s evidence is clearly

robust to the addition of 17 years of data.
sample:

In fact, the evidence is even stronger out of
in 1999–2015, the return gap is 17.39% per year (t = 2.14), compared to 9.38%

(t = 2.05) in the 1927–1998 period analyzed by Santa-Clara and Valkanov.

Table 2 shows that the Democrat-Republican return gap is larger when computed over

15Santa-Clara and Valkanov (2003) also use log returns. Simple returns lead to very similar results. Also

note that by using excess returns, we eﬀectively eliminate the eﬀects of inﬂation.

16Assigning January to the new president leads to very similar results.

18

the early years of a presidency. The gap is huge, 36.88% per year, when averaged over the

ﬁrst year of the presidency alone. Over the ﬁrst two years, the gap is 15.55%; over the

ﬁrst three years, it is 12.43%. All of these values exceed the full-term average of 10.90%.
This evidence is consistent with our mechanism in the presence of mean reversion in risk

aversion (e.g., Campbell and Cochrane, 1999). In the model, risk aversion is ﬁxed within

electoral periods, but allowing it to mean-revert would imply a larger return gap in the early

years of presidential terms. When risk aversion is high, so is the equity risk premium, and
a Democrat gets elected. As time passes, risk aversion mean-reverts, and the falling equity

premium fuels stock returns while the Democrat is in oﬃce. The opposite happens under

Republicans, resulting in a larger return gap in the early years of presidencies.

The presidential puzzle cannot be explained by higher risk under Democrats. In fact, the

volatility of stock returns under Democrats is lower, as shown by Santa-Clara and Valkanov

(2003). In 1927–2015, the volatility is 17.33% per year under Democrats and 20.00% per
year under Republicans. The annual Sharpe ratio is 0.62 under Democrats and -0.01 under

Republicans. Similarly, the puzzle cannot be explained by higher policy uncertainty, or its

faster resolution, under Democrats, as we show in the Online Appendix.

3.2.

International Evidence

For an international perspective on the presidential puzzle, we analyze stock returns in ﬁve
large developed countries outside the U.S.: Australia, Canada, France, Germany, and the

UK. For each country, we compute its excess market returns by subtracting the country’s

90-day interbank rate, obtained from FRED, from the country’s MSCI stock index returns,

which are available for 1970 through 2015. We compare each country’s average excess market
return when the U.S. president is a Democrat versus when he is a Republican.

Our approach reﬂects the view that international stock markets are mostly integrated in
that stocks are globally owned. We argue that the outcome of the U.S. presidential election—

the largest election in the developed world—is a signal about the level of global risk aversion.

One could also relate each country’s returns to the elections in that country, but doing so

would implicitly assume that international stock markets are segmented in that there are
no cross-border equity holdings. While markets do exhibit some home bias, they are far

from segmented. Another complication in analyzing country-by-country elections is that it

is diﬃcult to determine the vote shares of high-tax and low-tax parties. No large country

outside the U.S. has a simple two-party system. Even countries that come closest, such
as the UK, have smaller parties that enter into coalitions with the leading parties. Junior

19

coalition partners often have signiﬁcant bargaining power over government policy.

Table 3 shows that in each of the ﬁve countries, average return is higher when a Democrat

is in the White House. The Democrat-Republican diﬀerence is statistically signiﬁcant in four

of the ﬁve countries, ranging from 7.3% to 13.8% per year. These magnitudes are close to

those observed for the U.S. This evidence suggests that the outcome of the U.S. election is
related to equity risk premia across the globe. See the Online Appendix for more detail.

3.3. Economic Growth

The model predicts faster economic growth under Democratic presidents (Proposition 6).

Table 4 shows that GDP growth is indeed faster under Democrats. We use real GDP growth

data from BEA. In 1930 through 2015, the average growth is 4.86% per year under Democrats
but only 1.70% under Republicans. The Democrat-Republican growth gap, 3.16% per year,
is signiﬁcant both economically and statistically (t = 2.40).17 When we split the sample
into two or three equally long subperiods, we ﬁnd a positive gap in all of them. The gap is

not always statistically signiﬁcant, but it is at least 0.47% per year in all six time periods
considered. Post World War II, the gap is 0.74% per year.

Earlier studies report that the partisan growth gap is larger in the ﬁrst half of the
presidential term (e.g., Alesina and Sachs, 1988, Blinder and Watson, 2016). We conﬁrm this

ﬁnding in our longer sample. The growth gap over the ﬁrst two years of presidency is 3.34%

per year (t = 3.73), which exceeds the full-term average of 3.16% per year. This evidence

is consistent with our mechanism if we allow agents to reoptimize their occupational choice
between elections. Mean-reverting risk aversion leads agents to adjust their occupations

ahead of the next election, contributing to a gradual reduction of the growth gap.

3.4. Electoral Transitions

Our model predicts that transitions from Republicans to Democrats are more likely to happen
when the economy is weak, and vice versa (Figure 4). To examine this prediction, we run

logistic regressions in which the dependent variable is equal to one in months when one party

wins the presidential election over an incumbent president from the other party, and zero

otherwise. Our sample contains ﬁve transitions from a Republican president to a Democratic

17We follow the same approach to assessing statistical signiﬁcance as in Sections 3.1 and 3.2: we regress
GDP growth on the Democrat dummy D and compute the t-statistic for the slope coeﬃcient, based on
standard errors robust to both heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation.

20

president (1932, 1960, 1976, 1992, 2008) and four reverse transitions (1952, 1968, 1980, 2000).

Given the small numbers of observations, we include only one independent variable at a

time. We consider three such variables: log stock market excess return, real GDP growth,
and realized market variance estimated from daily data within the month. We average each

of these variables over the previous m months, where m ∈ {3, 6, 12, 36}.

Table 5 shows that transitions from Republicans to Democrats tend to be preceded by

poor economic performance. At all horizons, such transitions are preceded by low market

returns, low GDP growth, and high volatility. This evidence supports the model. In contrast,

no relation is signiﬁcant for reverse transitions from Democrats to Republicans.

One reason why we ﬁnd nothing for reverse transitions is that our model treats incum-

bents and challengers symmetrically, so it does not predict that incumbents tend to be kicked
out in bad times.18 That fact pulls opposite to our mechanism for transitions from Democrats
to Republicans, contributing to the no-result we observe for such transitions. Future work

can extend our model to incorporate the incumbent-challenger asymmetry.

According to Proposition 1, Democrats (Republicans) are elected when the median voter

is a government worker (entrepreneur). Electoral changes should thus be accompanied by

occupational ones—we should see increases in the number of government workers, and de-

creases in the number of entrepreneurs, around transitions from Republican to Democratic
presidents. Reverse transitions should be accompanied by opposite patterns. We construct

crude measures of government work and entrepreneurship for which the time series are rea-

sonably long. For government work, we add government employees and the unemployed.

For entrepreneurship, we use the number of new ﬁrms entering the economy. We run logistic
regressions similar to those in Table 5, focusing on changes around the transitions. We ﬁnd

that Republican-to-Democrat transitions tend to be accompanied by increases in government

work and decreases in entrepreneurship, as the model predicts. For reverse transitions, the

evidence is insigniﬁcant, but it points in the model-predicted direction. The evidence need
not be strong because the underlying eﬀect may be weak—in the model, a job change by a

single agent, the median voter, causes the election outcome to ﬂip. We conclude that our

evidence is consistent with the model. For details, see the Online Appendix.

18This fact is documented by Fair (1978) and others. While it is not predicted by the model presented

here, it is predicted by the models of P´astor and Veronesi (2012, 2013) and Kelly et al. (2016).

21

3.5. Risk Aversion

Risk aversion drives election outcomes in our model. In this section, we explore the role of

risk aversion empirically, both in the time series and in the cross section.

3.5.1. Time Series

We use four proxies for risk aversion. The proxy with the strongest theoretical justiﬁcation
is the surplus consumption ratio, which is perfectly negatively correlated with risk aversion

in the habit model of Campbell and Cochrane (1999).

In addition, we use the measures

of Pﬂueger et al. (2018), Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2018), and the unemployment rate.

We also use four proxies for the equity risk premium that may be related to risk aversion:
cay (Lettau and Ludvigson, 2001), the dividend-price ratio, the equity premium bound of

Martin (2017), and IPO volume, which is related to the equity premium in the model of

P´astor and Veronesi (2005). The details of all measures are in the Online Appendix.

Table 6 reports the results from time-series regressions of risk aversion on the Democrat

dummy, D, time in oﬃce, which is the number of months for which the party in power

has held the presidency, and the interaction of D and time in oﬃce. The slope on this
interaction term is signiﬁcantly negative for all four proxies, indicating that risk aversion

tends to decline over the course of a Democratic presidency. This evidence is consistent

with our model, in which a high level of risk aversion propels Democrats to power. The

subsequent mean reversion in risk aversion pushes up stock prices, especially in the early
years of Democratic presidencies, as shown earlier in Table 2. The evidence based on the risk

premium proxies is less conclusive. For three of the four proxies, the coeﬃcient estimates

also indicate a declining risk premium under Democrats, but none of the estimates are

statistically signiﬁcant. Overall, the evidence in Table 6 is consistent with our theory.

3.5.2. Cross Section

Strictly speaking, our model does not make cross-sectional predictions for risk aversion be-

cause it assumes that risk aversion varies over time but not across agents. However, the

model’s economic mechanism suggests that in the presence of cross-sectional heterogeneity,
more risk-averse agents would vote Democrat while less risk-averse ones would vote Repub-

lican. That is indeed true in the data, as we show next. Our evidence also supports the

predictions of Proposition 1 that entrepreneurs vote Republican while government workers

vote Democrat. We test these predictions in both U.S. and UK voter survey data. For the

22

U.S., we use data from the 2014 Cooperative Congressional Election Study. For the UK, we

use data from the 2014-2018 British Election Study.

For both countries, we estimate logit regressions across voters. On the left-hand side

is a dummy variable equal to one if the survey respondent supports the Democratic Party

(for the U.S.) or the Labour Party (for the UK), and zero otherwise. The right-hand side
variables include a proxy for the respondent’s risk aversion, dummy variables identifying the

respondent as an entrepreneur or a government worker, and controls for the respondent’s

income, education, age, and gender. We infer U.S. voters’ risk aversion from their responses

to questions about whether they would accept risky gambles. UK respondents report their
willingness to take risk. We describe all variables in detail in the Online Appendix.

Table 7 shows that more risk-averse voters are more likely to support both the Democratic

Party and the Labour Party. This evidence is consistent with the idea that risk-averse voters
avoid business risk but demand social insurance. Both parties also have more support among

government workers and less among entrepreneurs, as the model predicts. The results hold
for both countries, with and without controls, providing strong support for the model.19

3.6. Additional Evidence

We interpret the high-tax party as Democrats and the low-tax party as Republicans. It is

often argued that Democrats favor bigger government than do Republicans. For more evi-

dence, we compare changes in the tax burden under Democrat versus Republican presidents

in 1929 to 2015. We measure the tax burden by the ratio of total federal tax to GDP.

We ﬁnd that the tax burden tends to rise under Democratic presidents and fall under

Republican presidents. Under Democrats, the tax/GDP ratio rises by 0.44% per year, on
average, whereas under Republicans, it falls by 0.30% per year. The Democrat-Republican

diﬀerence of 0.74% per year is highly signiﬁcant (t = 3.15). When we split the sample

into two equally-long subperiods, we ﬁnd a positive and signiﬁcant Democrat-Republican

diﬀerence in both of them. We tabulate the results in the Online Appendix, where we also
describe the data in detail. Overall, it seems reasonable to interpret Democratic presidents

as favoring more tax-based redistribution and Republican presidents as favoring less.

This interpretation is unaﬀected by the consideration of the federal government’s budget

19For U.S. data, we can also measure whether the respondent has any investment in the stock market. We
ﬁnd that stock owners are less likely to vote Democrat. This evidence is consistent with our model, in which
stock owners are entrepreneurs. See the Online Appendix for details.

23

deﬁcit. While the deﬁcit tends to be larger under Democratic presidents, the partisan dif-
ference is not statistically signiﬁcant. See the Online Appendix for details.20 This evidence
suggests that our modeling assumption of no budget deﬁcit is not unreasonable.

Proposition 8 predicts a more favorable stock market reaction to the election of a Re-

publican president. This prediction is supported by the evidence of Snowberg et al. (2007).
The same proposition also predicts that electoral uncertainty commands a risk premium.

Support for that prediction is provided by Kelly et al. (2016).

Income is a key variable of interest in the literature on the determinants of voting behav-
ior. Richer Americans are more likely to vote Republican, but the relation is far from perfect

(e.g., Gelman et al., 2007). This evidence is consistent with our model. Entrepreneurs vote

Republican (Proposition 1) and they tend to be richer than government workers because

agents who choose entrepreneurship are endowed with higher skill (Proposition 2). The
model thus implies a positive relation between income and voting Republican. The relation
is imperfect because some entrepreneurs draw large negative values of εi,t+1 in equation (3)
and end up with low income. In short, our model produces a positive but imperfect relation

between income and the Republican vote, just like in the data.

The relation between income and voting Republican is positive unconditionally, and

strongly positive within states, but it is negative across states: richer states are more likely
to vote Democrat in presidential elections (Gelman et al., 2007). This evidence does not

necessarily go against our model.

In the model, it is not income but net position with

respect to ﬁscal redistribution that determines voting behavior. Some of the richer states

might be net beneﬁciaries of ﬁscal redistribution. For example, the state with the highest
average income in 2015, Maryland, has many residents with well-paid government jobs. The

role of ﬁscal redistribution in voting behavior clearly merits more research.

4. Conclusions

We develop an equilibrium model of political cycles driven by voters’ time-varying risk aver-

sion. This novel mechanism generates the presidential puzzle of Santa-Clara and Valkanov

(2003). The model implies that both stock returns and economic growth should be higher

20In the Online Appendix, we also extend our model by allowing the government to run a budget deﬁcit.
By running deﬁcits when risk aversion is high, and paying down debt when risk aversion is low, governments
can mitigate the eﬀect of risk aversion shocks. Yet, that setting produces the same key predictions as
our baseline model, including the presidential puzzle. In addition, it predicts higher average deﬁcits under
Democrats, for which there is statistically insigniﬁcant support in the data, as noted earlier.

24

under Democratic administrations, as we observe in the data. We also provide empirical

evidence, time-series and cross-sectional, linking risk aversion to voting preferences.

In our model, voting decisions are driven solely by economic considerations. This is in line

with the survey evidence of Ansolabehere et al. (2006) that economic issues matter more than

moral issues to U.S. voters. Yet, in reality, voters’ views on moral issues also matter, as do
the personal characteristics of the presidential candidates. Such non-economic considerations

can enter our model via the sunspot equilibrium. When risk aversion is neither high nor low,

the equilibrium is chosen by sunspots. Interpreting sunspots as random realizations of non-

economic factors creates a role for these factors in determining electoral outcomes.

Our model assumes a single policymaker, abstracting from the interaction between the

executive and the legislature. This assumption is often made for simplicity (e.g., Alesina,

Roubini, and Cohen, 1997), and it seems appropriate given our focus on the presidential
puzzle. While Santa-Clara and Valkanov (2003) ﬁnd stock returns to be related to the presi-

dential cycle, they ﬁnd no relation to Congressional variables. Similarly, Blinder and Watson

(2016) ﬁnd that the partisan advantage in GDP growth is correlated with Democratic con-

trol of the White House but not of Congress. Neither study provides an explanation for this
asymmetry. The lack of Congressional relevance is broadly consistent with our argument that

what matters is not what presidents do but when they get elected. If the stronger perfor-

mance under Democratic administrations were caused by Democrats’ superior policymaking,

we would expect Congressional variables to matter because presidents need Congressional
support to implement reforms. That Congressional variables do not matter undermines the

superior-policymaking explanation. Our explanation is only partial, though, for two reasons.

First, we assume that the president is able to enact his party’s tax rate, which requires Con-

gressional support. This is Congress’ only role in our explanation. Even that role can be
relaxed by modifying our model so that the election of a Republican president results in, say,

a 50% probability of a tax cut (if Congress is supportive) and a 50% probability of no tax

change (if Congress is not supportive). As long as voters expect taxes to fall (rise) when they

elect a Republican (Democratic) president, our model’s implications are unchanged. Second,
we do not have a full explanation for why risk aversion plays a larger role in presidential

elections than in Congressional ones. We speculate that Congressional elections are more

about local state-level issues whereas presidential elections are more reﬂective of the per-

formance of the national economy. The role of Congress can be further examined in future
research. Future work can also extend our model by endogenizing tax rates, which might

help us understand their time variation, and by adding learning about government quality,

which could generate asymmetries between incumbents and challengers.

25

Figure 1. Model overview and timeline.

26

•Beginningofperiodt:–Riskaversionγtdrawn–Agentsborn,chooseOccupation:(cid:26)EntrepreneurGovernmentworkerParty:(cid:26)High-taxLow-tax–Entrepreneursstartﬁrms,invest,trade•Endofperiodt:–FirmsproduceoutputYi,t+1,paytaxesanddividends–AgentsconsumeCi,t+1,dieFigure 2. Occupational choice. Agents whose entrepreneurial skill µi > µH always choose to be
entrepreneurs, regardless of which party is in power. Agents whose µi < µL always choose to be government
workers. Intermediate-skill agents, for whom µL < µi < µH , choose to be entrepreneurs when party L is in
power but government workers when party H is in power.

27

Always GE under LG under HAlways EiL_H_Figure 3. Equilibrium outcomes. For γt > γ, both µH and µL are positive; as a result, there is a unique
equilibrium in which the median voter is a government worker and party H wins the election. For γt < γ,
both µH and µL are negative; as a result, there is a unique equilibrium in which the median voter is an
entrepreneur and party L wins the election. For γ < γt < γ, two equilibria, H and L, are possible.

28

Risk Aversion ( t ) Skill ( i )__L_H_Unique eq.L winsUnique eq.H winsTwo eq.possibleFigure 4. Political cycles under endogenous risk aversion. This ﬁgure describes the formation of
political cycles in the model when risk aversion is modeled as negatively related to the state of the economy.

29

Risk aversion high Fast growth Risk aversion low Party L wins Slow growth Party H wins Figure 5. Average market returns under Democrat vs Republican presidents. This ﬁgure plots
average U.S. excess stock market returns under each of the 23 administrations between 1927 and 2015, from
President Coolidge through President Obama. We plot log returns on the value-weighted market index in
excess of log returns on the three-month Treasury bill. Presidents are assumed to be in oﬃce until the end
of the month during which they leave oﬃce. The horizontal dotted line plots the unconditional mean return.

30

19271935194419531962197119801989199820072015% Per Year-30-20-100102030Democratic PresidentsRepublican PresidentsTable 1
Average Stock Market Returns under Democratic and Republican Presidents

This table reports average excess stock market returns under Democratic presidents, Republican presidents,
and the Democrat-Republican diﬀerence. Excess stock returns are computed monthly as the log return on
the value-weighted total stock market in excess of the log return on a 3-month T-bill. Returns are reported
in percent per year, for the full sample period as well as for subperiods. Presidents are assumed to be in
oﬃce until the end of the month during which they leave oﬃce. t-statistics, reported in parentheses, are
computed based on standard errors robust to heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation.

1927:01–2015:12

1927:01–1971:06

1971:07–2015:12

1927:01–1956:08

1956:09–1986:04

1986:05–2015:12

1927:01–1998:12

1999:01–2015:12

Democrat

Republican

Diﬀerence

10.69
(4.17)

10.80
(2.83)
10.52
(3.46)

12.58
(2.51)
5.94
(1.62)
11.99
(3.49)

10.52
(3.54)
11.37
(2.48)

-0.21
(-0.07)

-0.20
(-0.03)
-0.22
(-0.06)

-1.89
(-0.20)
1.38
(0.37)
-0.99
(-0.21)

1.15
(0.32)
-6.02
(-0.91)

10.90
(2.73)

11.00
(1.58)
10.74
(2.24)

14.46
(1.37)
4.57
(0.85)
12.98
(2.17)

9.38
(2.05)
17.39
(2.14)

31

Table 2
Average Stock Market Returns in the Presidents’ Early Years in Oﬃce

This table reports average excess stock market returns under Democratic presidents, Republican presidents,
and the Democrat-Republican diﬀerence over the full sample period of January 1927 to December 2015. The
results are computed over subsets of presidents’ terms corresponding to their ﬁrst one, two, or three years
in oﬃce. Full-term results are identical to those reported in the ﬁrst row of Table 1.

Democrat

Republican

Diﬀerence

Year 1 in oﬃce

Years 1 and 2 in oﬃce

Years 1, 2, and 3 in oﬃce

Full term

21.75
(2.03)

11.47
(1.73)

15.00
(3.11)

10.69
(4.17)

-15.13
(-1.94)

-4.08
(-0.66)

2.57
(0.56)

-0.21
(-0.07)

36.88
(2.70)

15.55
(1.56)

12.43
(1.67)

10.90
(2.73)

32

Table 3
International Evidence on the Presidential Puzzle

For each country, this table reports the diﬀerence between that country’s average excess stock market returns
in periods when the U.S. president is a Democrat versus a Republican. Stock return data are from Morgan
Stanley Capital International, covering the period 1970–2015. Excess stock returns are computed monthly
as the log return on the country’s market index minus the log of the country-speciﬁc 90-day interbank rates
from FRED. Returns are in percent per year. Presidents are assumed to be in oﬃce until the end of the
month during which they leave oﬃce. t-statistics, reported in parentheses, are computed based on standard
errors robust to heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation.

Australia Canada France Germany

UK

Dem-Rep

11.31
(2.05)

13.62
(2.78)

13.78
(2.33)

11.63
(2.02)

7.33
(1.38)

33

Table 4
Average GDP Growth under Democratic and Republican Presidents

This table reports average GDP growth under Democratic presidents, Republican presidents, and the
Democrat-Republican diﬀerence. GDP growth is reported in percent per year for the full sample period
as well as for equally long subperiods. t-statistics, reported in parentheses, are computed based on standard
errors robust to heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation.

1930:01–2015:12

1930:01–1972:12

1973:01–2015:12

1930:01–1958:08

1958:09–1987:04

1987:05–2015:12

Democrat

Republican

Diﬀerence

4.86
(4.87)

6.11
(4.06)
3.02
(7.12)

6.46
(3.07)
4.64
(7.09)
2.91
(7.59)

1.70
(1.96)

0.36
(0.18)
2.54
(4.98)

-1.86
(-0.63)
3.16
(4.40)
2.21
(4.32)

3.16
(2.40)

5.75
(2.33)
0.47
(0.76)

8.31
(2.33)
1.47
(1.50)
0.70
(1.27)

34

Table 5
Predicting Electoral Transitions

This table reports the estimated slopes and their t-statistics from a logistic regression model. The left-
hand side variables, given in column headings, are dummy variables that are equal to one if the given
electoral transition occurs in the current month and zero otherwise. The left column reports results for
elections resulting in transitions from a Republican president to a Democratic president. The right column
corresponds to transitions from a Democratic president to a Republican president. Each regression has a
single right-hand side variable. The right-hand side variables are log stock market return in excess of the
risk-free rate, real GDP growth, and realized market variance estimated from daily data within the month.
Each right-hand side variable is the average of the corresponding quantity computed over the previous m
months, where m ∈ {3, 6, 12, 36} varies across the four panels.

Transition from

Transition from

Republicans to Democrats Democrats to Republicans

Panel A. Lag of 3 months

Stock return

GDP growth

Market variance

Stock return

GDP growth

Market variance

Stock return

GDP growth

Market variance

Stock return

GDP growth

Market variance

-13.66
(-1.33)
-0.17∗∗
(-2.38)
10.66∗∗∗
(3.38)

-0.32
(-0.02)
-0.01
(-0.12)
-10.00
(-0.43)

Panel B. Lag of 6 months

-16.19
(-1.03)
-0.17∗∗
(-2.26)
12.35∗∗∗
(2.57)

10.94
(0.48)
-0.04
(-0.38)
-11.39
(-0.47)

Panel C. Lag of 12 months

-36.44∗∗
(-2.09)
-0.14∗
(-1.80)
13.58∗∗
(2.02)

11.99
(0.39)
-0.02
(-0.22)
-6.67
(-0.34)

Panel D. Lag of 36 months

-66.33∗∗
(-2.46)
-0.17∗
(-1.95)
12.59
(1.15)

60.22
(0.93)
0.07
(0.66)
-20.56
(-0.65)

∗: signiﬁcant at 10% level; ∗∗: signiﬁcant at 5% level; ∗∗∗: signiﬁcant at 1% level

35

Table 6
Time Series of Risk Aversion

This table reports the slope coeﬃcients from time-series regressions in which the left-hand side variables are
four proxies for risk aversion (columns 1 through 4) and four proxies for the equity risk premium (columns
5 through 8). The risk aversion proxies are “CC,” the negative of the surplus consumption ratio (Campbell
and Cochrane, 1999), “PVS,” the negative of the price of volatile stocks (Pﬂueger et al., 2018), “MR,” the
aggregate risk aversion measure of Miranda-Agrippino and Rey (2018), and “UNE,” the unemployment rate.
The risk premium proxies are “CAY” (Lettau and Ludvigson, 2001), “DP,” the aggregate dividend-price
ratio, “IM,” the one-year equity premium bound of Martin (2017), and the negative of IPO volume (P´astor
and Veronesi, 2005). The right-hand-side variables are the Democrat dummy D, which is equal to one if a
Democratic president is in oﬃce and zero otherwise, time in oﬃce, which is the number of months for which
the party in power has held the presidency, and the interaction of D and time in oﬃce. The intercept is
included in the regression. All slope coeﬃcients are multiplied by 100. t-statistics, reported in parentheses,
are computed based on standard errors robust to heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation.

Proxies for Risk Aversion

Proxies for Equity Risk Premium

CC

PVS

MR

UNE

CAY

DP

IM

IPO

Democrat

Time in oﬃce

1.09
(1.87)

0.01
(1.33)

45.19
(1.59)

0.37
(1.57)

138.19
(2.20)

0.60
(0.92)

118.60
(1.08)

0.74
(0.73)

Interaction

-0.03
(-2.66)

-0.85
(-2.11)

-2.99
(-3.20)

-2.25
(-2.20)

0.40
(0.29)

0.01
(0.71)

-0.01
(-0.56)

-0.28
(-0.32)

0.01
(0.92)

0.00
(0.28)

2.37
(1.16)

0.01
(0.34)

11.82
(0.96)

0.11
(1.07)

-0.02
(-0.54)

-0.16
(-0.85)

Observations

683

183

252

816

256

1068

193

672

36

Table 7
Who Are the Democratic Voters?

This table reports the slope coeﬃcients from logit regressions estimated across voters. In columns 1 through
4, the left-hand side variable represents the support for the U.S. Democratic Party among the respondents
to the 2014 Cooperative Congressional Election Survey. The variable is equal to one if the respondent voted
for the Democratic candidate (Obama) in the 2012 presidential election and zero otherwise. In columns 5
through 8, the left-hand side variable represents the support for the UK Labour Party among the respondents
to the 2014-2018 British Election Study. The variable is equal to one if the respondent expresses support
for the Labour Party and zero otherwise. The right-hand-side variables are listed in the ﬁrst column. The
intercept is included in the regression. The t-statistics are in parentheses.

U.S. Democratic Voters

UK Labour Voters

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Risk Aversion

Entrepreneur

Government Worker

0.13
(7.28)

0.12
(6.04)

-0.28
(-5.68)

0.12
(5.89)

-0.25
(-5.04)

0.19
(3.39)

Income

Education

Age

Gender (Male)

0.12
(5.40)

-0.15
(-2.65)

0.12
(1.95)

-0.03
(-3.47)

0.26
(13.30)

-0.01
(-4.50)

-0.62
(-11.62)

0.14
(8.23)

0.14
(5.23)

-0.40
(-7.83)

0.16
(4.77)

-0.41
(-6.38)

0.22
(4.07)

0.14
(3.72)

-0.39
(-4.95)

0.26
(3.99)

-0.10
(-12.86)

0.44
(7.94)

-0.01
(-4.83)

-0.16
(-3.02)

Observations

8855

7809

7771

6784

30301

12626

7949

6279

37

REFERENCES

Alesina, Alberto, 1987, Macroeconomic policy in a two-party system as a repeated game,

Quarterly Journal of Economics 102, 651–678.

Alesina, Alberto, and Howard Rosenthal, 1995, Partisan Politics, Divided Government, and

the Economy, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Alesina, Alberto, Nouriel Roubini, and Gerald D. Cohen, 1997, Political Cycles and the

Macroeconomy, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Alesina, Alberto, and Jeﬀrey Sachs, 1988, Political parties and the business cycle in the

United States, 1948-1984, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 20, 63–82.

Aschauer, David Alan, 1989, Is public expenditure productive? Journal of Monetary Eco-

nomics 23, 177–200.

Ansolabehere, Stephen, Jonathan Rodden, and James M. Snyder, 2006, Purple America,

Journal of Economic Perspectives 20, 97–118.

Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis, 2016, Measuring economic policy

uncertainty, Quarterly Journal of Economics 131, 1593–1636.

Barro, Robert J., 1990, Government spending in a simple model of endogenous growth,

Journal of Political Economy 98, 103–125.

Belo, Frederico, Vito D. Gala, and Jun Li, 2013, Government spending, political cycles, and

the cross-section of stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics 107, 305–324.

Belo, Frederico, and Jianfeng Yu, 2013, Government investment and the stock market, Jour-

nal of Monetary Economics 60, 325–339.

Blinder, Alan S., and Mark W. Watson, 2016, Presidents and the US economy: An econo-

metric exploration, American Economic Review 106, 1015–1045.

Bom, Pedro R.D., and Jenny E. Ligthart, 2014, What have we learned from three decades of
research on the productivity of public capital? Journal of Economic Surveys 28, 889–916.
Boutchkova, Maria, Hitesh Doshi, Art Durnev, and Alexander Molchanov, 2012, Precarious

politics and return volatility, Review of Financial Studies 25, 1111–1154.

Broz, J. Lawrence, 2013, Partisan ﬁnancial cycles, Politics in the New Hard Times: The
Great Recession in Comparative Perspective, Edited by David A. Lake and Miles Kahler,
Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY.

Campbell, John Y., and John H. Cochrane, 1999, By force of habit: A consumption-based
explanation of aggregate stock market behavior, Journal of Political Economy 107, 205–
251.

Cameron, David R., 1978, The expansion of the public economy: A comparative analysis,

American Political Science Review 72, 1243–1261.

Downs, Anthony, 1957, An economic theory of political action in a democracy, Journal of

Political Economy 65, 135–150.

Drazen, Allan, 2000a, The political business cycle after 25 years, NBER Macroeconomics

Annual 15, 75–117.

Drazen, Allan, 2000b, Political Economy in Macroeconomics, Princeton University Press,

Princeton, NJ.

38

Dubois, Eric, 2016, Political business cycles 40 years after Nordhaus, Public Choice 166,

235–259.

Fair, Ray C., 1978, The eﬀect of economic events on votes for president, Review of Economics

and Statistics 55, 159–173.

Fern´andez-Villaverde, Jesus, Pablo Guerr´on-Quintana, Keith Kuester, and Juan Rubio-
Ram´ırez, 2015, Fiscal volatility shocks and economic activity, American Economic Review
105, 3352-3384.

Gelman, Andrew, Boris Shor, Joseph Bafumi, and David Park, 2007, Rich state, poor state,
red state, blue state: What’s the matter with Connecticut?, Quarterly Journal of Political
Science 2, 345–367.

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, 2016, Time varying risk aversion, Journal

of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Hensel, Chris R., and William T. Ziemba, 1995, United States investment returns during
Democratic and Republican administrations, 1928-1993, Financial Analysts Journal 51,
61–69.

Hibbs, Douglas A., 1977, Political parties and macroeconomic policy, American Political

Science Review 71, 1467–1487.

Hibbs, Douglas A., 1987, The American Political Economy: Macroeconomics and Electoral

Politics, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Huang, Roger D., 1985, Common stock returns and presidential elections, Financial Analysts

Journal 41, 58–61.

Julio, Brandon, and Youngsuk Yook, 2012, Political uncertainty and corporate investment

cycles, Journal of Finance 67, 45–83.

Kelly, Bryan, ˇLuboˇs P´astor, and Pietro Veronesi, 2016, The price of political uncertainty:

Theory and evidence from the option market, Journal of Finance 71, 2417–2480.

Knight, Brian, 2006, Are policy platforms capitalized into equity prices? Evidence from the

Bush/Gore 2000 presidential election, Journal of Public Economics 90, 751–773.

Koijen, Ralph S.J., Tomas J. Philipson, and Harald Uhlig, 2016, Financial health economics,

Econometrica 84, 195–242.

Lettau, Martin, and Sydney Ludvigson, 2001, Consumption, aggregate wealth, and expected

stock returns, Journal of Finance 56, 815–849.

Lynde, Catherine, and James Richmond, 1992, The role of public capital in production,

Review of Economics and Statistics 74, 37-45.

Martin, Ian, 2017, What is the expected return on the market? Quarterly Journal of Eco-

nomics 132, 367–433.

Miranda-Agrippino, Silvia, and Helene Rey, 2018, US monetary policy and the global ﬁnan-

cial cycle, Working paper.

Niederhoﬀer, Victor, Steven Gibbs, and Jim Bullock, 1970, Presidential elections and the

stock market, Financial Analysts Journal 26, 111-113.

Nordhaus, William D., 1975, The political business cycle, Review of Economic Studies 42,

169–190.

39

P´astor, ˇLuboˇs, and Pietro Veronesi, 2005, Rational IPO waves, Journal of Finance 60, 1713–

1757.

P´astor, ˇLuboˇs, and Pietro Veronesi, 2012, Uncertainty about government policy and stock

prices, Journal of Finance 67, 1219–1264.

P´astor, ˇLuboˇs, and Pietro Veronesi, 2013, Political uncertainty and risk premia, Journal of

Financial Economics 110, 520–545.

P´astor, ˇLuboˇs, and Pietro Veronesi, 2016, Income inequality and asset prices under redis-

tributive taxation, Journal of Monetary Economics 81, 1–20.

Pﬂueger, Carolin, Emil Siriwardane, and Adi Sunderam, 2018, A measure of risk appetite

for the macroeconomy, Working paper.

Potrafke, Niklas, 2017a, Partisan politics: The empirical evidence from OECD panel studies,

Journal of Comparative Economics, forthcoming.

Potrafke, Niklas, 2017b, Government ideology and economic policy-making in the United

States, Working paper.

Quadrini, Vincenzo, and Antonella Trigari, 2007, Public employment and the business cycle,

Scandinavian Journal of Economics 109, 723–742.

Reed, W. Robert, 2006, Democrats, Republicans, and taxes: Evidence that political parties

matter, Journal of Public Economics 90, 725–750.

Riley, William B., and William A. Luksetich, 1980, The market prefers republicans: Myth

or reality?, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 15, 541-560.

Rogoﬀ, Kenneth, and Anne Sibert, 1988, Elections and macroeconomic policy cycles, Review

of Economic Studies 55, 1–16.

Santa-Clara, Pedro, and Rossen Valkanov, 2003, The presidential puzzle: Political cycles

and the stock market, Journal of Finance 58, 1841–1872.

Snowberg, Erik, Justin Wolfers, and Eric Zitzewitz, 2007, Partisan impacts on the economy:
Evidence from prediction markets and close elections, Quarterly Journal of Economics
122, 807–829.

Tavares, Jos´e, 2004, Does right or left matter? Cabinets, credibility and ﬁscal adjustments,

Journal of Public Economics 88, 2447–2468.

Wright, John R., 2012, Unemployment and the democratic electoral advantage, American

Political Science Review 106, 685–702.

40
