UCLA
Recent Work

Title
Political Cycles and the Stock Market

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/00n6f3ph

Authors
Santa-Clara, Pedro
Valkanov, Rossen

Publication Date
2000-06-01

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Political Cycles and the Stock Market∗

Pedro Santa-Clara a
The Anderson School
University of California, Los Angeles

Rossen Valkanov b
The Anderson School
University of California, Los Angeles

June 2001

∗ We thank Antonio Bernardo, Michael Brandt, Michael Brennan, Bhagwan Chowdhry, Brad Cornell, Eugene
Fama, Shingo Goto, Mark Grinblatt, Harrison Hong, Jun Liu, Francis Longstaﬀ, Monika Piazzesi, Richard
Roll, Jos´e Tavares, and especially an anonymous referee and Maria Gonzalez, for useful comments. We are
also greatful to Kenneth French and G. William Schwert for providing ﬁnancial data. All remaining errors
are our own.
a The Anderson School; University of California, Los Angeles; 110 Westwood Plaza; Los Angeles, CA
90095-1481; Phone: (310) 206-6077; Fax: (310) 206-5455; Email: pedro.santa-clara@anderson.ucla.edu.
b Corresponding author. The Anderson School; University of California, Los Angeles; 110 West-
wood Plaza; Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481; Phone:
(310) 206-5455; Email:
rossen.valkanov@anderson.ucla.edu.

(310) 825-7246; Fax:

Political Cycles and the Stock Market

Abstract

We ﬁnd that the average excess return in the stock market is higher under
Democratic than Republican presidents– a diﬀerence of 9 percent per year
for the value-weighted portfolio and 16 percent for the equal-weighted port-
folio. The diﬀerence is economically and statistically signiﬁcant, does not
seem to be due to small sample biases, and is robust in diﬀerent subsamples.
There is a remarkable monotonicity in the diﬀerence of returns for size-decile
portfolios, from 7 percent for large ﬁrms to about 22 percent for small ﬁrms.
Presidential partisan cycles have a heterogeneous impact on industry re-
turns: the tobacco, telecom, and chemical industries have performed better
under Republican presidents, whereas the real estate, construction, and ser-
vices industries have fared signiﬁcantly better under Democrats. We test
three plausible explanations for these ﬁndings. First, the relation might be
due to political variables proxying for business-cycle factors. Second, the
relation might be attributed to unexpected returns around elections, when
information is revealed, rather than to expected returns varying with the
political cycle. Lastly, diﬀerences in stock market riskiness across presiden-
tial regimes could account for the diﬀerence in average returns. We reject
all three hypotheses. As it stands, the diﬀerence in excess returns during
Republican and Democratic presidencies is a puzzle that cannot easily be
explained. However, the cross-sectional evidence from size-sorted and indus-
try portfolios suggests that the party in the presidency may aﬀect the stock
market through diﬀerences in ﬁscal and regulatory policies.

1 Introduction

In the run up to all presidential elections, the popular press is awash with reports about

whether Republicans or Democrats are better for the stock market. Unfortunately, the

popular interest has not been matched by academic research. This paper tries to ﬁll the gap

by conducting a careful empirical analysis of the relation between presidential elections and

the stock market.

Using data since 1927, we ﬁnd that the average excess return of the value-weighted CRSP

index over the 3-month Treasury bill rate has been about 2 percent under Republican and 11

percent under Democratic presidents – a striking diﬀerence of 9 percent! This diﬀerence is

economically and statistically signiﬁcant, does not seem to be due to small-sample estimation

biases, and is robust in diﬀerent subsamples. The results are even more impressive for the

equal-weighted portfolio, in which case the diﬀerence in excess returns between Republicans

and Democrats reaches 16 percent. Moreover, we observe an absolute monotonicity in the

diﬀerence between size-decile portfolios under the two political regimes: from 7 percent for

the largest ﬁrms to about 22 percent for the smallest ﬁrms.

It is perhaps less surprising

to ﬁnd that the eﬀect of political variables varies from industry to industry. For some

industries, such as real estate and construction, returns are about 10 percent higher under

Democrats, whereas for others, such as the tobacco industry, returns are 10 percent higher

under Republicans.

We examine three plausible explanations for these ﬁndings. First, the presidential-partisan

cycle might merely be proxying for variations in expected returns due to business cycle ﬂuc-

tuations. Indeed, previous research has found that GDP growth is slower during Republican

presidential mandates, and that Democratic administrations have been associated with sig-
niﬁcantly higher inﬂation rates.1 There is also substantial evidence that macroeconomic
variables related to the business cycle can forecast stock market returns.2 Therefore, the

eﬀect of political variables on the stock market might only be proxying for variations in the

business cycle. To test this“proxy” hypothesis, we examine the relation between stock mar-

ket returns and political variables using macro variables known to forecast the stock market

as controls for business cycle ﬂuctuations. After controlling for the dividend-price ratio, the

1See Alesina and Rosenthal (1995) and Alesina et al. (1997) and references therein.
2See, for example, Chen, Roll and Ross (1986), Keim and Stambaugh (1986), Campbell and Shiller (1988),

Fama and French (1988, 1989), Campbell (1991), and Fama (1991).

1

default and term spreads, the relative interest rate, and the NBER business cycle dates, our

results remain unchanged. The diﬀerence between Democratic and Republican presidencies

is still around 10 percent for value-weighted returns and 20 percent for equal-weighted re-

turns, statistically signiﬁcant, and stable over diﬀerent sample periods. Presidential terms

thus capture variations in returns that are orthogonal to what is explained by business cycle

ﬂuctuations.

Second, we examine whether the relation between excess returns and the presidential-partisan

cycle is due to information revealed around election dates. To the extent that there are

diﬀerences in economic policies across political parties, and these policies are thought to

have an eﬀect on the stock market and the real economy, it is natural to expect that the

election results would aﬀect stock valuations. However, we ﬁnd no signiﬁcant evidence of

stock price changes immediately before, during, or immediately after elections. This ﬁnding

is consistent with evidence that important news are seldom related to large stock market
returns, and vice-versa.3 It is diﬃcult to rigorously test the market’s response to election

news because the timing of the information is hard to ascertain. In fact, the results of most

elections are largely anticipated so that it is diﬃcult to determine when exactly the winner

is known. To get around this problem, we examine the reaction of the stock market to

the result of the four most contested (and hence hardest to predict) presidential elections.

We ﬁnd no signiﬁcant evidence of large returns immediately before or after Republican or

Democratic victories. To the contrary, the diﬀerence in returns grows gradually over the

term of the presidency. In sum, there is no evidence of unexpected returns around election

dates.

A third possible explanation would be that risk is higher during Democratic than during Re-

publican presidencies. This diﬀerence in riskiness might arise from diﬀerences in economic

policies pursued by each party, or from varying levels of uncertainty among investors about

these policies. If this were indeed the case, then the higher returns observed during Demo-

cratic terms could be explained as compensation demanded by investors for the greater risks

incurred in those periods. However, we ﬁnd that market volatility is actually higher under
Republican presidents, contrary to the hypothesis.4

3For example, see Cutler et al. (1989).
4Although, after controlling for the state of the economy, the diﬀerence in risk under the two regimes

becomes insigniﬁcant.

2

We conjecture that some of the variation in stock market returns under Republicans and

Democrats is due to diﬀerences in their economic policies. For this explanation to hold, the

economic policies must have a direct impact on the stock market beyond their indirect eﬀect

through the business cycle. For example, variations in capital gains taxes, health insurance

coverage, environmental laws, and Social Security beneﬁts can undoubtedly have an eﬀect on

consumption and saving rates, portfolio allocation, as well as on the cash ﬂows of companies.

The evidence from the cross-section of returns lends indirect support to this hypothesis. It

is important to note that these diﬀerences in economic policy would have to be largely

unanticipated by investors, so that the diﬀerences in returns are realized gradually during

the presidential mandate instead of being concentrated around the election date. Testing for

the direct eﬀects of given ﬁscal and regulatory policies on stock returns necessitates richer

and more disaggregated data, which we leave for future work.

Other authors have documented the diﬀerence in stock returns under Republican and Demo-

cratic presidents, notably Hensel and Ziemba (1995), Herbst and Slinkman (1984), Huang

(1985), Johnson, Chittenden, and Jensen (1999), and Siegel (1998). Our paper is the ﬁrst to

formally test the relation between political cycles and the stock market, examine the robust-

ness of this relationship, investigate cross-sectional returns, and use macroeconomic control

variables. Also, there exists a rich empirical and theoretical literature about the eﬀects of

political cycles on the macroeconomy. For surveys in this area, see Alesina et al. (1997)

and Drazen (2000). These books also oﬀer convincing evidence that political variables have

an impact on the state of the macroeconomy. Some of our tests are loosely motivated by

hypotheses formulated in that literature.

The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section two introduces the data and the

notation used in the paper. Section three discusses the empirical methods and presents

the main results: the signiﬁcant and robust correlation between excess market returns and

presidential-partisan variables.

In section four, we test the three hypotheses for the dif-

ferences in returns across political cycles. Section ﬁve oﬀers cross-sectional evidence for

size-decile and industry portfolio returns. Section six sets out the research agenda for future

work and concludes.

3

2 Data

In this section we describe the variables used in the study. For clarity of exposition, the date

are categorized into ﬁnancial variables, political variables, and control variables. Tables 1

and 2 provide exact deﬁnitions and summary statistics for quick reference. All series are

at monthly frequency. As a check of robustness, we perform the statistical analysis on four

diﬀerent sample periods:

(cid:127)

(cid:127)

(cid:127)

(cid:127)

1927:01-1998:12 – The entire sample period: 863 monthly observations, 18 elections,

10 Democratic and 8 Republican presidents.

1946:01-1998:12 – The period after WWII: 635 monthly observations, 13 elections, 6

Democratic and 7 Republican presidents.

1946:01-1993:12 – The period after WWII excluding the 1994:01-1998:12 market run-

up: 575 monthly observations, 11 elections, 4 Democratic and 7 Republican presidents.

1960:01-1998:12 – The most recent period: 467 monthly observations, 10 elections, 5

Democratic and 5 Republican presidents.

The ﬁrst period covers the entire sample, including the Great Depression, the subsequent

recovery, and the years of WWII. To make sure that our results are not driven by the

tumultuous years of 1927-1945, the second subsample excludes that unusual period. The

third subsample covers the post WWII period but excludes the recent rise in stock valuations.

Finally, the fourth period covers only the most recent years. Unfortunately, due to the lack
of variability in the political variables, ﬁner subsamples are impossible to study.5

Financial Variables: We use the log monthly returns of the value-weighted (VWRt) and
equal-weighted (EWRt) portfolios from CRSP. The log interest rate (TBLt) is computed
from the 3-month Treasury Bill, obtained from Ibbotson Associates. INFt is the log monthly
inﬂation, from Ibbotson Associates. Additionally, we use cross-sectional returns from 10 size

5It would have been logical to divide the sample as 1927-1945, 1946-1960, 1961-1998. However, in that
case, the ﬁrst subsample would have contained only Democratic presidents, with the exception of the last 2
years of Hoover. Similarly, the 1946-1960 period would have contained only 4 changes in administrations,
an insuﬃcient sample for the identiﬁcation of breaks. As discussed below, we had trouble running some of
the regressions even for the 1960-1998 sub-sample.

4

decile portfolios (DECjt, for j=1, 2, ..., 10) and from 48 industry portfolios, obtained from
Kenneth French. The acronyms used for the log industry returns are self-explanatory and

can be found in Table 11. For the exact SIC codes corresponding to the industries, refer to

the appendix in Fama and French (1997). We conduct the statistical analysis in this paper

with excess and real returns – for example, when studying the value-weighted portfolio,

we compute VWRt-TBLt (log value-weighted return minus log interest rate) and VWRt-
INFt (log value-weighted return minus log inﬂation).6 We compute the monthly volatility of
the value weighted portfolio return (VOLt) from within-month daily return data, using the
approach of French, Schwert, and Stambaugh (1987). The daily return data is from Schwert

(1990).

Although there are (limited) return and interest rate series going further back in time,7 two

main reasons lead us to restrict the analysis to the post 1927 period. First, there is evidence

that the ideologies of the Democratic and Republican parties before WWI were not clearly

delineated. Second, returns of size decile and industry portfolios and data for most of the

control variables are not available before 1927.

Political Variables: We deﬁne the following presidential cycle variables:8

RDt = 1, if a Republican is in oﬃce at time t, RDt = 0, otherwise.

DDt = 1, if a Democrat is in oﬃce at time t, DDt = 0, otherwise.

(cid:127)

(cid:127)

Similarly, we deﬁne variables for Congress and the Senate:

(cid:127)

(cid:127)

RSDt = 1, if there is a Republican majority in the Senate at time t, RSDt = 0,
otherwise.

DSDt = 1, if there is a Democratic majority in the Senate at time t, DSDt = 0,
otherwise.

6This is the most convenient way to abstract from the eﬀect of inﬂation. Political macroeconomists have
widely agreed that inﬂation is higher during Democratic terms. Fama (1981), Geske and Roll (1983), Kaul
(1987), and Goto and Valkanov (2000) provide evidence of the eﬀect of monetary policy on returns and
inﬂation.

7See Schwert (1990).
8When the acronym of the variable ends with a letter “D”, it is a dummy variable.

5

(cid:127)

(cid:127)

RHDt = 1, if there is a Republican majority in Congress at time t, RHDt = 0, other-
wise.

DHDt = 1, if there is a Democratic majority in Congress at time t, DHDt = 0,
otherwise.

We also deﬁne a set of variables related to the timing of elections:

(cid:127)

(cid:127)

(cid:127)

(cid:127)

(cid:127)

MD(j)t = 1, if time t is within j months before a presidential election at time t,
MD(j)t = 0, otherwise.

RBD(j)t = 1, if time t is within j months before a presidential election that is won by
a Republican, at time t, RBD(j)t = 0, otherwise.

DBD(j)t = 1, if j months before a presidential election that is won by a Democrat, at
time t, DBD(j)t = 0, otherwise.

RAD(j)t = 1, if j months after a presidential election that is won by a Republican, at
time t, RAD(j)t = 0, otherwise.

DAD(j)t = 1, if j months after a presidential election that is won by a Democrat, at
time t, DAD(j)t = 0, otherwise.

Notice that the above dummies represent a one time shock to the mean of the ﬁnancial

quantities, whereas the ﬁrst set of index variables captures a permanent mean shift in the

series.

The political variables that we use are either motivated by previous political macroeconomic

studies or are chosen to test prior beliefs. The ﬁrst set of variables captures diﬀerences in

political parties in control of the White House, the House of Representatives, the Senate, and

any combination of the three. Those variables are loosely motivated by a “partisan” view
of political cycles,9 which emphasizes the policymakers’ diﬀering motivations and political

platforms. The second set of political variables allows us to test for unusual eﬀects before,

or at any time during the election period, irrespective of the political party in power. Such

9See Hibbs (1977) and Alesina (1987).

6

variables can be motivated by “opportunistic” models of political behavior, where policy-

makers choose policies that maximize their chances of staying in oﬃce (Nordhaus (1975),

Lindbeck (1976), Rogoﬀ (1990), Persson and Tabellini (1990)).

Control Variables: The conditioning variables we use are the annualized log dividend

price ratio (DPt), the term spread (TSPt) between the yield to maturity of a 10-year Treasury
Note and the 3-month Treasury Bill, the default spread (DSPt) between yields of BAA and
AAA rated bonds, the relative interest rate (RR) computed as the deviation of the 3-month

Treasury Bill rate from its one-year moving average, and an index variable (NBERDt) that
equals 1 if the economy is deemed in expansion by the NBER at time t.

We have tried to be as exhaustive in our list of conditioning variables as possible. Some

of these variables might be correlated. However, if we had to err, we wanted to err on the

side of including redundant information, rather than forgetting relevant information, which

would lead to inconsistent estimates. The use of these variables is incontroversial, as they all

have been used more than once in previous studies. Some of the most widely cited papers

that take the dividend price ratio, the term spread or the default spread as predictors are

Keim and Stambaugh (1986), Campbell and Shiller (1988), Fama and French (1988, 1989),

and Fama (1991). The power of the relative interest rate to forecast expected returns was

argued in Campbell (1991), and Hodrick (1992). We include the NBER index as another

proxy for business cycle conditions.

3 Political Cycles and Stock Market Returns

In this section, we establish the empirical fact that presidential-partisan cycles have been

associated with excess returns in the stock market as well as with diﬀerences in the real risk-

free interest rate. Furthermore, we document that the diﬀerence in stock market returns

under Republican and Democratic returns is robust in diﬀerent subsamples, and cannot be

attributed to statistical inference problems.

7

3.1 Major Findings

Figure 1 plots the average excess value-weighted annual returns during each presidency in

the 1927-1998 period. Republican periods are shaded in a darker color, and the dash-dotted

line denotes the unconditional mean of the series. Contrary to the widely-held popular belief,

excess returns under Republican presidents were historically lower than under Democratic

presidents. Only one (out of 10) Democratic presidency (Roosevelt, 1937-1941) has known

signiﬁcantly lower than average excess returns, and only one (out of 8) Republican presidency

(Eisenhower, 1953-1957) has been associated with signiﬁcantly higher than average returns.

To measure the correlation between (excess and real) returns and political variables, we run

regressions:

rt+1 = α + βπt + ut+1

(1)

where, returns are denoted by rt+1 and the political variable by πt. Under the null hypothesis
of political cycles having no eﬀect on returns, we must have β = 0. Table 3A presents the

results from regressing the excess and real returns of the value-weighted and equal-weighted

portfolios and for the real interest rate on index variables for Republican and Democratic
presidential mandates.10 The coeﬃcients are simply the means of returns during the Re-

publican and Democratic presidencies. The probabilities of rejecting the null hypothesis,

reported below the estimates, are computed using asymptotic (heteroskedasticity and serial-

correlation corrected) standard errors (Newey-West (1987)) as well as using bootstrapped

standard errors, by resampling the residuals of the regressions. The regressions are also

estimated for various subsamples.

During the 1927-1998 period, the value-weighted excess return under a Democratic White

House was 10.69 percent per year, whereas it was only 1.69 percent per year under a Republi-

can president, amounting to a diﬀerence of 9.01 percentage points, which is economically and

statistically signiﬁcant. The diﬀerence between regimes of the equal-weighed excess returns

are as high as 16.52 percent. It is interesting to notice that the diﬀerence in excess returns

is due to both the risky rate being higher and the riskless rate being lower on average under

10We run a regression of market returns on Republican (RD) and Democratic (DD) presidential dummies,
α2 = 0

or rt+1 = α1RDt + α2DDt + ut+1. The hypothesis of no diﬀerence between the coeﬃcients, or α1
is equivalent to β = 0 in the regression rt+1 = α + βRDt + ut+1.

−

8

Democrats than Republicans.11 For the full sample, the 9.01 percent diﬀerence in excess

return of the value-weighted index can be decomposed into a higher average stock market

return of 5.31 percent under Democrats and the real T-bill rate being 3.70 percent higher

on average under Republicans than Democrats. However, the statistical signiﬁcance of the

total diﬀerence is driven by the diﬀerence in stock market returns.

It is remarkable to ﬁnd that the results are robust in all subsamples. The diﬀerence in excess

returns persists and is always economically and statistically signiﬁcant, even for the 1946-

1993 period, which is the most favorable for Republicans. Indeed, the diﬀerence is never

smaller than 5.4 percent (during 1946-1993). The economic magnitude of this ﬁnding is

highly signiﬁcant. If the return on capital is from 5.4 to 9 percent higher under Democratic

presidents, then investigating and understanding the reasons behind this discrepancy in

economic performance is deﬁnitely a worthwhile endeavor. Obtaining statistical signiﬁcance

in subsamples is surprising given the low power of our test, especially in periods during which

only a few presidential elections were held. The lack of power also prevented us from testing
more complex hypotheses, such as whether the diﬀerence has been decreasing over time.12

Similar regressions were conducted with Congressional variables, and a combination of those

variables with Presidential terms. Since none of those variables seem to be correlated with

returns, we relegate the results from those regressions to the appendix.

3.2 Robustness

The diﬀerence in returns is intriguing not only by its economic signiﬁcance, but also because

it is so stable across diﬀerent subperiods. However, it may be argued that the ﬁndings are

driven by a few outliers or that our statistical inference is plagued by small sample biases.

In this subsection, we use a randomization-bootstrap procedure and quantile regressions

to demonstrate that the observed diﬀerence in returns during Republican and Democratic

administrations is a robust feature of the data.

11Previous studies have concentrated on stock returns rather than excess returns, and ﬁnd smaller diﬀer-
ences between Republican and Democratic administrations, generally in the order of 4-5 percent. See Hensel
and Ziemba (1995), Johnson et al. (1999), and Siegel (1998). All of those studies were used the S&P500
index as a proxy for the stock market.

12A decreasing diﬀerence over time could be interpreted as evidence for learning.

9

3.2.1 Randomization-Bootstrap

The standard errors in Table 3A are computed using estimators that are robust to serial

correlation and heteroskedasticity in the residuals. However, the results may still be driven by

a “lucky draw” from the political variables. After all, there are only 18 distinct presidencies

in our sample and even fewer switches of the White House between parties. To address this
concern, we turn to a randomization-bootstrap procedure,13 which is formally developed in
Davison and Hinkley (1997), and Efron and Tibshirani (1998).14 We address the question:

How likely would it be to observe such a diﬀerence in returns during political regimes that

are truly independent of returns?

To ﬁnd the small sample distribution of the t-statistic, t, under the null,15 we conduct

t

T

{

{

πt

rt+1

the following resampling experiment. We draw 10,000 samples of T observations each by
T
T
t=1. Denote the j-th sample by
resampling independently from the series
t=1 and
}
t=1, for j = 1, ..., 10, 000. We can compute ˆβj and the corresponding tj as in
t+1, πj
rj
regression (1). The bootstrapped distribution of t under the null hypothesis is simply the
ª
©
distribution of the 10,000 draws of tj. The mean of the bootstraped distribution of ˆβ is
denoted by ˆβ. Under the null, returns under Democratic and Republican presidencies must
be equal to each other and to the unconditional mean, that is ˆβ = 0. The bootstrapped
t
denotes the number of tj’s that are
p-value is computed as pboot =
≥
}
higher than the computed t statistic.

tj
#
10,000 , where #
{

t
}

≥

tj

{

}

Table 3B presents the results from the randomization-bootstrap tests. The ﬁrst number (in

square brackets) below the estimates is the mean of the corresponding parameter from the

randomized samples. As noted above, under the assumption that returns are independent of

the political variables, the mean return under the two regimes must be equal to each other

and to the unconditional mean (in Table 2). The second number below the estimates is the p-

value pboot. We focus our attention on the column “Diﬀ,” which can be compared directly with
column “Diﬀ” in Table 3A, since both columns test the hypothesis of no diﬀerence in returns

between the two regimes. The diﬀerence between political regimes is mostly signiﬁcant at the

10 percent, for the value-weighted returns and is mostly signiﬁcant at the 1 percent level for

13We thank the referee for this excellent suggestion.
14There are several equivalent ways of setting up this bootstrap. We chose a setup that lends itself to a
multivariate generalization, which allows us to extend the analysis with control variables in the regressions.
15The maintained null hypothesis is that there is no relationship between returns and political variables.

10

equal-weighted returns across periods. Approximating the small-sample distribution of the

t-statistic using a non-parametric randomization-bootstrap produces conservative results,

which makes it that much more remarkable that we ﬁnd such a clear diﬀerence in stock

market performance during Democratic versus Republican presidencies.

3.2.2 Quantile Regressions

A related concern is whether the above results are driven by a few outliers, such as the

extremely negative returns during the Hoover administration and the unusually high returns

during the Roosevelt years. To address this concern, we run quantile regressions. We ask

whether a particular quantile of the distribution of returns accounts for the diﬀerence between

Republican and Democratic administrations. Conditional quantiles can be thought of as the

inverse of the conditional distribution, and therefore contain the same information. By

analyzing the entire distribution of returns under the two regimes, we can precisely ﬁnd

what quantiles of the distribution account for the diﬀerences in means.

Before discussing our results, we present a brief introduction to quantile regressions. Let

r). Then, for any quantile

the unconditional distribution of rt+1 be Frt+1 (r) = Pr(rt+1
τ , 0 < τ < 1, we can deﬁne the inverse of Frt+1 (.) as Qrt+1 (τ ) = inf
The function Qrt+1 (.) is called the unconditional quantile function of r. Qrt+1 (0.5) is the
ª
50th quantile, or the median, of rt+1. The introduction of conditional quantiles is eas-
ily understood by making an analogy to the familiar least squares estimation. The con-
z = zt) = z0tη, for some explanatory variables z, is esti-
z0tη)2 . Similarly, the conditional quantile function

r : Frt+1 (r)

t (rt+1

≤

≥

©

τ

|

.

ditional mean function E(rt+1
mated by solving ˆη = arg minη
Qrt+1

z (τ

Z = zt) = z0tη (τ ) can be estimated by solving:
P

−

|

|

ˆη(τ ) = arg min

η

ρτ (rt+1

z0tη(τ ))

−

t
X

where ρτ (.) is a piecewise linear “check function,” deﬁned as ρτ (u) = u (τ
I(.) is the indicator function. The function ρτ (.) selects the quantile τ to be estimated
(see Koenker and Hallock (2000)). As above, for the case τ = 0.5, ρ0.5(u) =
and the
solution of the above problem, ˆη(0.5), is equivalent to minimizing the sum of absolute values
of the residuals. From the deﬁnition ˆQrt+1
Z = zt) = z0t ˆη (0.5) represents the estimate
Z (0.5
|
of the conditional median of rt+1. For diﬀerent values of τ , the estimate ˆη(τ ) is the eﬀect of

I (u < 0)) and

u
|

−

|

|

11

th quantile of rt+1. An estimate of the entire function ˆQrt+1
Z = zt) can
Zt on the τ
be computed from the above linear relation. For a more detailed introduction to quantile

Z (τ
|

−

|

regressions, please refer to Koenker and Hallock (2000), and Koenker (2000).

We run the quantile regression:

ˆα(τ ), ˆβ(τ )

h

i

= arg min
α,β

t
X

ρτ (rt+1

α(τ )

−

−

β(τ )RDt)

(2)

where the coeﬃcient β (τ ) captures the quantiles of the diﬀerence in returns between Repub-

licans and Democrats. The estimation is conducted for τ = 0.02, 0.04,..., 0.98. The results
of this quantile regression are plotted in Figure 2, where the diﬀerence ˆβ(τ ) is plotted in a
solid line, the 95 percent bootstrapped conﬁdence intervals are plotted in light dashed lines,

and the oveall unconditional mean of the diﬀerence is plotted for reference. We can clearly

see that the diﬀerence in returns between Republicans and Democrats is signiﬁcant (outside

the conﬁdence interval) for quantiles 30 to 60, for value-weighted returns, and for quantiles

20 to 75, for equal-weighted returns. To summarize, extreme realizations at the tails of the

distribution do not account for the observed diﬀerence in returns between Republicans and

Democrats.

4 Three Potential Explanations

In this section we investigate three potential explanations for the empirical relation between

political cycles and returns in the stock market.

4.1 A “Proxy” Explanation

The most natural explanation for the correlation between presidential-partisan terms and

excess returns is based on a “proxy” eﬀect. Since variations in returns have been associated
with business cycle ﬂuctuations,16 and business cycle ﬂuctuations have been associated with
political variables,17 it is only natural to suspect that the correlation between excess returns

and political variables is only the reﬂection of the correlation between the business cycle and

16See Campbell (1991), Fama (1991), and Campbell et al. (1997) for a textbook treatment.
17There is an extensive list of theoretical and empirical papers in this area. Some of the most recent
empirical papers are Blomberg and Hess (1997), Faust and Irons (1999), and Gonzalez (2000). For excellent
reviews, see Alesina, Roubini and Cohen (1997), Alesina and Rosenthal (1995), and Drazen (2000).

12

political variables. If political variables were indeed proxying for such business cycle factors,

then the strong correlation between presidential mandates and excess returns would come

as no surprise. However, this correlation should evaporate once we take those factors into

account.

To test the “proxy” hypothesis, we augment equation (1) in the following manner:

rt+1 = α + βπt + γ0Xt + ut+1

(3)

where Xt is a vector containing predetermined macroeconomic variables, associated with the
business cycle and known to forecast the stock market: the “annualized” log dividend yield

(DP), the term spread (TSP), the default spread (DSP), the stochastically detrended real

risk-free interest rate (RR), and an index for the NBER business cycle dates (NBERD). If

political variables contain only information about returns that can be explained by business

cycle ﬂuctuations, then the coeﬃcient β should equal zero.

Surprisingly, after conditioning on Xt, the presidential partisan variables remain statistically
signiﬁcant. Moreover, the magnitude of the coeﬃcients is very similar to the case without

conditioning variables, indicating that the political variables have explanatory power for

expected returns that is orthogonal to the business cycle variables. Table 4 presents the

results from those regressions. In regression (3), all control variables are demeaned, so that

the coeﬃcients of the political index variables can be directly compared with those from

Table 3. The coeﬃcients of RD and DD are displayed in Table 4A for the value-weighted

returns, equal-weighted returns, and the real interest rate, for each of the subsamples. In
Table 4, the parameters γ are suppressed for clarity of exposition.18 After controlling for

the macroeconomic forecasters of returns, the correlation between the political variables and

returns is, if anything, stronger. The diﬀerence between the Republican and Democratic

value-weighted returns remains between 6.1 and 10.5 percent (annualized) in the diﬀerent

subsamples, and is even more statistically signiﬁcant than in Table 3. As observed above, it

is the diﬀerence in returns of the stock market rather than the diﬀerence in the interest rate

that accounts for the biggest portion of the diﬀerence in excess returns. The diﬀerence in

equal-weighted returns remains high, at around 20 percent, and statistically signiﬁcant. In

other words, given similar economic conditions, the excess and real returns under Republican

presidents have been between 10 and 20 percent lower than the returns under Democratic

18The estimates of γ are available upon request.

13

presidents.

In fact, under Republican presidents, the equity premium is not signiﬁcantly

diﬀerent from zero for any of the portfolios. In conclusion, the results in Table 4 indicate

that the correlation between returns and political variables is not due to an indirect relation

between business cycle factors and presidential mandates.

To verify the robustness of the conclusions, we run the randomization-bootstrap tests and

quantile regressions once again. The results from the randomization test are displayed in

Table 4B, where the ﬁrst number (in square brackets) below the estimates is the parameter

from the bootstrap and the second number is the empirical probability of rejecting the null

of no relationship between returns and political index variables. The diﬀerence in returns

is signiﬁcant in all subsamples at the 10 percent level, for the equal-weighted returns. For

the value-weighted portfolio, the diﬀerence is mostly signiﬁcant at the 10 percent level, with

the exception of two subsamples where the probabilities are around 15 percent. Once again,

those results are surprisingly signiﬁcant, given the conservative randomization procedure and

the modest power of our tests. We should also not lose from sight the economic signiﬁcance

of the diﬀerence, which is never lower than 6 percent.

Figure 3 displays the results from the quantile regression:

ˆα(τ ), ˆβ(τ ), ˆγ (τ )

h

= arg min
α,β,γ

i

t
X

ρτ (rt+1

α(τ )

−

−

β(τ )RDt

−

γ(τ )0Xt)

where ˆβ(τ ) captures the quantiles of the diﬀerence in returns between Republicans and
Democrats. The solid curve plots the estimates of the diﬀerence in quantiles. Conﬁdence

intervals and the null of no eﬀect between political parties, shown in lighter dashed and

solid lines, were computed using a randomization-bootstrap procedure as described above.

Controlling for business cycle ﬂuctuations has very little eﬀect on the results. The diﬀerence

in the distribution of returns between regimes comes mainly from the middle 40 percent

quantiles and not from outliers at the tails of the distributions.

To recapitulate the ﬁndings in this subsection, political variables capture variations in re-

turns that seem almost orthogonal to macroeconomic conditioning variables. Therefore, the

correlation between returns and presidential index variables cannot be attributed to the

latter’s proxying for business cycle ﬂuctuations.

14

4.2 Elections Shocks

Thus far, we have shown that political partisan cycles capture variations in average returns.

We have said nothing about whether the diﬀerence in average returns between Republicans

and Democrats corresponds to a diﬀerence in expected or in unexpected returns. It is possible

that the diﬀerence in the estimated average returns is not due to systematic diﬀerences in

expected returns but to unexpected returns around election dates. In other words, it may be

the case that the entire diﬀerence is concentrated in the periods surrounding elections, when

information about the future party to hold the presidency (with the corresponding economic

and political platform) is revealed. Election “news” conveys information about the future

economic policy of the presidency, and therefore about future cash ﬂows and expected returns

of the stock market. In this case, assuming rational expectations, the results of elections

should have an immediate impact on asset prices. However, once the information is fully

incorporated into asset prices, there should be no further diﬀerence in returns during the

rest of the presidential terms in oﬃce. In contrast, if we observe a diﬀerence in returns that

materializes gradually during the presidential mandate, it is likely that it corresponds to a

diﬀerence in expected returns – that is, a diﬀerence in the risk premium of the stock market.

Unless, of course, we admit that presidents of diﬀerent parties repeatedly surprise investors

during their tenure in oﬃce.

Using regression (3) with diﬀerent timing variables, we can’t ﬁnd evidence of statistically

signiﬁcant returns before elections, nor is the diﬀerent in returns due to any particular period

of the presidency. Tables 5 and 6 present the results from those regressions. More precisely,

in Table 5, we test whether excess returns during the last few months leading to the election

are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the rest of the term, irrespective of the party in oﬃce. All

tests are conducted for the value-weighted and equal-weighted portfolio returns, for the real

interest rate, and for several periods before the elections. Although the point estimates of

mean excess returns before elections are higher, the diﬀerence is not statistically signiﬁcant.

Admittedly, the insigniﬁcant results might be due to the lack of power of our test. For

example, in the MD(0) case (for returns during the month of the election itself) there are

only 18 observations to estimate the mean of returns. Similarly, for the MD(3) case, there

are only 54 observations to estimate the mean of excess returns three months before the

election. We cannot tell if the estimates represent real diﬀerences or if the outcomes are due

15

to chance, especially since, as we increase the number of observations (for example, going

from MD(0) to MD(6)), the point estimates decline.

Table 6 presents similar results, conditioning on the party that won the elections. The

results are largely unchanged. The market does not respond signiﬁcantly to election shocks,

irrespective of the party that is about to win the elections. The diﬀerence in returns does

not seem to be due to the period preceding the election. The lack of market reaction to

election news is quite puzzling, given the magnitude of the observed diﬀerence in returns for

the entire mandate. However, our results parallel those of Cutler et al. (1989) who ﬁnd that

major news announcements that are likely to have real eﬀects are not translated into large

price movements.

The ﬁndings in Tables 5 and 6 are also consistent with the fact that the outcomes of most

elections are predictable (Fair (1982, 1996)). The forecasts of election outcomes are widely

available from Gallup and are closely followed by the media. Therefore, it is reasonable

to assume that market participants have already incorporated information about the new

presidency in market prices by the time of the election. If there is any political uncertainly left

for the day of the election itself, it should be minimal. This makes it hard to test the “election

shocks” hypothesis. However, a few presidential elections have been closely contested, and

two of them were even wrongly forecasted by Gallup and the media. Unfortunately, such

true political shocks are rare, clearly insuﬃcient for rigorous statistical testing. We thus

conduct an informal study of those cases and provide evidence of very limited, to non-

existent, abnormal returns around elections.

Figure 4 shows the daily movement in price of the value-weighted portfolio around the dates

of the four elections that have either been wrongly forecasted by Gallup, or whose outcomes

were very close ex-post. From the four pictures, only the Truman/Dewey outcome seems

to have had a large eﬀect on prices right after the election. In the other three elections,

prices did not seem to respond much to the election results, thus conﬁrming our results

that abnormal returns around elections cannot account for the observed diﬀerence in returns

during Republican and Democratic presidencies.

As another illustration of this point, Figure 5 displays the price of the value-weighted port-

folio in all elections and around elections that were won by Republicans or by Democrats.

Panels A-D depict diﬀerent windows around the election dates. The ﬁrst two panels show

16

that prices do not diﬀer signiﬁcantly during the period immediately before or after the elec-

tion. However, the diﬀerence in the performance of the value-weighted portfolio widens

during the ﬁrst year of the new president, as shown in panel C. The diﬀerence grows gradu-

ally and almost homogeneously throughout the entire presidential cycle, as shown in panel

D.

In sum, the market seems to react very little, if at all, to presidential election news. Given

that election shocks fail to explain the diﬀerence in returns, and that the diﬀerence builds

gradually over the course of the presidency, diﬀerences in unexpected returns can be ruled

out as a potential explanation.

4.3 Varying Risk

Another potential explanation for the diﬀerence in average returns would be a diﬀerence

in stock market risk under Democratic and Republican presidents. Under this explanation,

diﬀerences in economic policy of the two parties would translate into diﬀerences in the

volatility of returns.

In this case, the diﬀerence in average returns between Republicans

and Democrats could be attributed to compensation for risk demanded by investors. We

investigate this hypothesis by measuring the volatility of returns during Democratic and

Republican presidencies.

We ﬁrst run a regression of the monthly volatility (computed from within-month daily re-

turns), VOL, on the political dummies RD and DD. Table 7 reports the results. For the

overall sample, we ﬁnd that volatility tends to be higher by about 1.4 percent per year un-

der Republican presidents than under Democrat presidents. This diﬀerence is, however, not

statistically signiﬁcant. When considering the subsamples starting in 1946 and 1960, the

diﬀerence in volatility increases to 2.8 percent and 3.4 percent respectively, and becomes sig-

niﬁcant. Thus, we ﬁnd that Republican mandates have witnessed marginally higher volatility

than Democratic mandates. This diﬀerence goes in the opposite direction of what would be

required to explain the diﬀerence in mean returns in a world where excess returns are pro-

portional to volatility, as in Merton’s ICAPM.

Table 8 investigates further the diﬀerence in volatilities by adding the macroeconomic control

variables to the regression. We ﬁnd that these variables – the default spread and the NBER

recession index in particular – signiﬁcantly help explain the behavior of volatility through

17

time. After controlling for these macroeconomic variables, the diﬀerence in volatility across

the political cycle is attenuated. For the entire sample, the diﬀerence actually changes
sign, although it is statistically insigniﬁcant.19 However, in the more recent subsamples, the

volatility continues to be higher under Republican presidents, even after controlling for the

state of the economy.

Figure 6 shows graphically the relation between risk and return in all presidential mandates.

It is clear that there is a diﬀerence in the risk-return tradeoﬀ between the two regimes.

The points in the mean-standard deviation space that correspond to Democratic presidents

typically dominate the points corresponding to Republican presidents.

To summarize, volatility is somewhat higher during Republican presidencies, which goes

against our conjecture that the diﬀerence in mean returns could be attributed to compensa-

tion for risk.

5 Cross-Sectional Diﬀerences

In the previous sections we documented the performance of the overall stock market returns

across diﬀerent parties in the presidency. In this section we study the cross-section of stock

returns. In particular, we examine the returns of portfolios sorted on the market capital-

ization of ﬁrms, as well as industry-based portfolios. We investigate whether the impact of

the political cycle is felt diﬀerently for large versus small ﬁrms, and whether some industries

have beneﬁtted more than others from each type of administration.

5.1 Diﬀerences in Size-Sorted Portfolio Returns

Table 9 displays the estimates from regressing the excess returns of the 10 size decile portfolios

on the presidential index variables. The results, although similar to those in Tables 3 and 4,

contain a surprising pattern. The diﬀerence between returns is inversely related to the

market capitalization of the companies. The smallest companies (decile 1) display the largest

disparity in returns during the Republican and Democratic Presidencies – 21 percent per

year – during the entire sample period. The diﬀerence in returns of the biggest companies

19This is driven by the great depression, where explaining the extreme volatility of the period requires

large coeﬃcients on the default spread and the NBER recession dummy.

18

−

(decile 10) remains economically and statistically signiﬁcant – 7.71 percent (annualized)

– but is three times smaller. The results from the subsamples were very similar and,

hence, are omitted. This size eﬀect explains the diﬀerence between the results in the value-

weighted and equally-weighted regressions. The former put (relatively) more weight on large

companies, whereas the latter put more weight on small companies. Finally, the robustness

check in Table 9B, conducted using the randomization-bootstrap discussed above, conﬁrms

the statistical signiﬁcance of the cross-sectional results.

It could be argued that the diﬀerences in the eﬀect of political variables on the excess returns

of the size-decile portfolios is simply due to the fact that small stocks tend to have higher

betas on the market than big stocks. According to this explanation, political variables only

aﬀect the overall level of the market and the large eﬀect on small stocks is due to their high

sensitivity to market moves. To investigate this possibility, we run regressions of the excess

returns of the size-decile portfolios on the political variables together with the excess return

on the value-weighted portfolio. Table 10 shows the estimates of the coeﬃcients on RD, DD

and V W R

T BL. Note that the coeﬃcients of RD and DD are not directly comparable

with the ones presented in Table 9, because the excess return on the value-weighted portfolio

has a non-zero mean. However, the diﬀerence between the coeﬃcients on RD and DD does

have the same interpretation as before. We see that, after controlling for the diﬀerences in

beta with respect to the market, the political variables retain considerable explanatory power

for the diﬀerence in expected returns of portfolios formed according to size. The diﬀerence

for the smallest decile is still of the order of 10 to 15 percent. For the overall sample, the

diﬀerence in “beta-adjusted” mean returns is signiﬁcant for all size-decile portfolios.

In

the more recent subsamples, the statistical signiﬁcance disappears for the biggest ﬁrms but

remains high for smaller stocks. We believe that this evidence may shed further light on

the “small-ﬁrm eﬀect.” For example, it might be the case that Republican and Democratic

economic policies, and the risks associated with those policies, have a diﬀerent impact on

small and large companies. Such a cross-sectional diﬀerence, although beyond the scope of

the current paper, can provide a possible explanation not only of the “small-ﬁrm eﬀect” but

also of the channels through which political cycles aﬀect stock returns.

19

5.2 Diﬀerences in Industry Portfolio Returns

In this subsection, we investigate the relation between political variables and a cross-section

of 48 industry returns.

Political parties are divided in their support to various industries. The platform of the De-

mocratic party places higher priority on environmental preservation, support to labor unions,

and stronger regulatory intervention, while the planks of the Republican party have evolved

around deregulation and weakening government control on most business activities. From

this perspective, the impact of federal taxation, spending, and regulatory policies should

have a diﬀerential eﬀect on industry returns. The partisan diﬀerences could perhaps be

translated into more beneﬁcial Democratic policies for labor-intensive and highly unionized

industries, such as services and construction. On the other hand, industries that are sub-

ject to considerable regulation, such as tobacco, telecom, and chemicals, might beneﬁt from

Republican administrations.

Interestingly, the performance of the industries falls very much in line with these partisan

convictions.

Indeed, after running regressions similar to those in section 3 on industry

portfolio returns, we ﬁnd that presidential cycle variables are signiﬁcantly correlated with

industry returns. Table 11 displays industry returns under Republican and Democratic

regimes, whereas Table 12 allows for diﬀering industry “betas” by conditioning the results

on the excess market return, V W R

T BL. For about 20 (out of 48) industries, returns

are higher under Democratic presidents. However, there are industries, such as tobacco,

−

with signiﬁcantly higher returns under Republicans. The industries with the most favorable

returns under Democrats – about 15 to 20 percent higher than under Republicans – are

real estate, construction, personal services, and business services, whereas the tobacco, food,

chemicals, and soda industries have registered about 8 to 10 percent higher returns under

Republicans.

There is a link between the results for size-decile portfolios of the previous subsection and

the ﬁndings for industry portfolios. During the 1963-1998 period, industries with the highest

average ﬁrm size – tobacco, soda, and telecom – have earned signiﬁcantly higher returns

under Republicans.

In general, industries with high average ﬁrm size, such as utilities,

chemical, food, auto, and drugs have averaged signiﬁcantly larger returns under Republican

administrations. Similarly, 8 out of the 10 industries with the smallest average ﬁrm size

20

– real estate, construction, agriculture, personal services, wholesale, rubber, health, and
fabricated products – have registered signiﬁcantly higher returns under Democrats.20

The cross-sectional results suggest that our political cycle variables may be capturing the

eﬀect of federal economic policies on market stock returns.

6 Conclusion

This paper documents that excess returns correlate with presidential-partisan cycles and

tests some obvious hypotheses as to the provenance of this correlation.

The major stylized facts that we document are:

1. The excess return of the value-weighted CRSP portfolio over the one-month Treasury

bill is, on average, 9 percent higher under Democrat than Republican administrations.

The premium on the equal-weighted CRSP portfolio is, on average, 16 percent higher

under Democratic presidential terms (Table 3).

2. The presidential cycle variables capture information about expected returns that is

orthogonal to business cycle variables (Table 4).

3. There is no evidence that pre- or post-election excess returns are higher than average

(Tables 5 and 6, and Figure 4). The diﬀerence in excess returns builds up homo-

geneously throughout the presidential term – it is not due to any particular period

during the presidency (Figure 5).

4. Volatility is somewhat higher in Republican presidencies (Table 8).

5. The diﬀerence in returns decreases monotonically with the market capitalization of

ﬁrms. The diﬀerence varies from 7 percent for the largest ﬁrms to about 22 percent

for the smallest ﬁrms (Tables 9 and 10).

20We use data for the average ﬁrm size per industry for the 1963-1998 period, obtained from Ken French
and used in Fama and French (1997). The 10 industries with the highest average ﬁrm size (average ﬁrm size
in millions of US dollars in parentheses) are: Smoke (5,193), Soda (4,791), Telcm (1,821), Hshld (1,516),
Comps (1,135), Drugs (1,104), Autos (1,085), Aero (1,056), Oil (985), and Util (879). The 10 industries
with the lowest average ﬁrm size are: RlEst (94), Cnstr (115), Rubbr (116), Agric (119), Txtls (122), PerSv
(137), Clths (157), Whlsl (164), FabPr (168), Hlth (171).

21

6. The impact of presidential cycle variables varies across industries (Tables 11 and 12).

7. Congressional mandates do not have a statistically signiﬁcant eﬀect on excess stock

returns (Tables I, II and III in appendix).

The mechanism through which political variables impact stock returns remains an open

question. We conjecture that the presidency aﬀects the stock market through its ﬁscal and

regulatory policies. There is an extensive literature that analyzes the impact of monetary

policy on ﬁnancial markets. However, the eﬀect of ﬁscal policy on the stock market has
largely been ignored.21 The cross-sectional evidence we present gives some support to this

hypothesis.

Indeed, the patterns we ﬁnd in small versus large ﬁrms and in diﬀerent in-

dustries are in line with ideological diﬀerences across the political parties. This raises the

strong suspicion that economic policies pursued by the president may beneﬁt some ﬁrms and

industries over others. The eﬀect on the stock market overall would then be the cumulative

eﬀect of these economic policies on the universe of ﬁrms. Tracing the unambiguous eﬀect of

political parties on stock returns would necessitate data on government taxation, spending,

deﬁcit, and other regulatory policies, which we leave for future work.

Whatever the fundamental factor that underlies the diﬀerence in returns between Republican

and Democratic presidents, the small market reaction to election news is diﬃcult to reconcile

(in a rational expectations framework) with the observed long-term diﬀerences in returns.

However, relaxing rational expectations would lead us into only recently explored territories.

Another fundamental question that we leave open is: do political variables cause ﬂuctuations

in stock returns, or is it the other way around? In this paper, we have implicitly assumed that

political variables, and the election of the president in particular, are exogenous events. This

assumption was given some support when we established that political variables do not proxy

for ﬂuctuations in the business cycle. However, there are a variety of models that successfully

predict the outcome of presidential elections using economic data. Endogenizing the political

cycles and their explicit modeling is a complicated problem that certainly deserves further

attention.

21Fiscal policy has largely been ignored in economics in general. It is only recently that people have started

to look at the eﬀect of ﬁscal policy on the economy (Blanchard and Perotti (2000)).

22

Appendix: Additional Evidence

The main body of the paper focuses mainly on Presidential cycles. We have carried out a

similar analysis for Congressional cycles and for the interaction between Presidential and

Congressional cycles. A priori, the party that control Congress would seem a promising

variable, since most taxing and spending initiatives are initiated and decided in Congress.

However, we ﬁnd no evidence of correlation between excess returns and Congressional vari-

ables. Tables I, II, and III present some of that evidence.

Table I presents the test of whether a political majority in the Senate or the House of

Representatives has an eﬀect on returns, beyond what we have already observed from the

presidential cycles. The coeﬃcients on the variable “RSD” can be interpreted as the dif-

ference in returns during a Republican-majority Senate and a Democratic-majority Senate.

Similarly, the coeﬃcients on “RHD” can be interpreded as the diﬀerence in excess returns

during a Republican and a Democratic House of Representatives. The diﬀerences, although

economically important, are statistically insigniﬁcant. Similar results were obtained when

the usual macroeconomic control variables were added to the regressions. The only ﬁnancial

variable that is correlated with the Congressional dummies is the real interest rate.

Tables II and III conduct similar tests. The goal of those tables is to quantify the diﬀerent

means of excess returns and the real interest rate during diﬀerent Congress and White House

political combinations. The message from those tables is that the party in control of the

Senate or the House of Representatives matters little beyond the party in control of the

White House.

23

References

[1] Alesina, A., 1987, “Macroeconomic Policy in a Two-Party System as a Repeated Game,”

Quarterly Journal of Economics, 102, 651-78.

[2] Alesina, A. and H. Rosenthal (1995), P artisan Politics, Divided Government, and the

Economy, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

[3] Alesina, A., N. Roubini, and G. Cohen (1997), Political Cycles and the Macroeconomy,

Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

[4] Campbell, J.Y., 1991, “A Variance Decomposition for Stock Returns, ” The Economic

Journal, 101, 157-179.

[5] Campbell, J.Y. and R.J. Shiller, 1988, “Stock Prices, Earnings, and Expected Divi-

dends,” Journal of Finance, 43, 661-676.

[6] Campbell, J.Y., 1999, “Asset Prices, Consumption, and the Business Cycle,” Chap-

ter 19, Handbook of Macroeconomics, Volume 1C, Eds. J. Taylor adn M. Woodford,

Elsevier.

[7] Campbell, J.Y., A. Lo, and A.C. MacKinlay, 1997, “The Econometrics of Financial

Markets,” Princeton University Press.

[8] Chen, N., R.Roll and S.Ross, 1986, “Economic Forces and the Stock Market,” Journal

of Business, 59, 383-403.

[9] Cutler, D, J. Poterba, and L. Summers, 1989, “What moves stock prices,” Journal of

Portfolio Management, 59, 4-12.

[10] Davison, A.C. and D.V. Hinkley, 1997, Bootstrap Methods and their Application, Cam-

bridge Series in Statistical and Probabilistic Methematics, Cambridge University Press.

[11] Dixit, A. and J. Londregan (1996), Redistributional Politics and Economic Eﬃciency,

American Political Science Revew, 89, 856-66.

[12] Drazen, A. (2000), Political Economy in Macroeconomics, Princeton University Press,

Princeton.

24

[13] Efron, B. and R.J. Tibshirani, 1998, An Introduction to the Bootstrap, Monographs of

Statistics and Applied Probability #57, Chapman & Hall/CRC.

[14] Fama, E.F. and K.French, 1988, “Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns,” Jour-

nal of Financial Economics, 22, 3-27.

[15] Fama, E.F. and K.French, 1989, “Business Conditions and Expected Returns on Stocks

and Bonds,” Journal of Financial Economics, 25, 23-49.

[16] Fama, E.F. and K.French, 1997, “Industry Cost of Equity,” Journal of Financial Eco-

nomics, 43, 153-193.

[17] Fama, E., 1991, “Eﬃcient Capital Markets: II,” Journal of Finance, 46, 1575-1648.

[18] Fama, E., 1990, Stock Returns, Expected Returns, and Real Activity, Journal of Fi-

nance, 45:4, 1089-1108.

[19] Fama, E.F., 1981, “Stock Returns, Real Activity, Inﬂation, and Money,” American

Economic Review, 71(4), 545-565.

[20] Fair, R., 1982, “The Eﬀect of Economic Events on Votes for President: 1980 results,”

Review of Economics and Statistics, 60, 159-173.

[21] Fair, R., 1996, “The Eﬀect of Economic Events on Votes for President: 1992 update,”

Political Behavior, 119-139.

[22] Faust, J., and J. Irons, 1999, “Money, Politics and the Post-War Business Cycle,”

Journal of Monetary Economics, 43, 61-89.

[23] French, K., G. Schwert, and R. Stambaugh, 1987, “Expected Stock Returns and Volatil-

ity,” Journal of Financial Economics, 19, 3-30.

[24] Geske, R. and R.Roll, 1983, “The Fiscal and Monetary Linkage between Stock Returns

and Inﬂation,” Journal of Finance, 38(1), 1-33.

[25] Gonzelez, M., 2000, “Do Changes in Democracy aﬀect the Political Budget Cycle?

Evidence from Mexico,” Manuscript, Princeton University.

25

[26] Goto, S. and R. Valkanov, 2000, The Fed’s Eﬀect on Excess Returns and Inﬂation is

Bigger Than You Think, Working Paper, Anderson School of Management, UCLA.

[27] Hensel, C. and W. Ziemba, 1995, United States Investment Returns during Democratic

and Republican Adminstrations, 1928-1993, Financial Analysts Journal, March-April

1995.

[28] Herbst, A. and C. Slinkman, 1984, Political-Economic Cycles in the U.S. Stock Market,

Financial Analysts Journal, March-April.

[29] Hibbs, D.1977, “Political Parties and Macroeconomic Policy,” American Political Sci-

ence Review, 71, 1467-87.

[30] Hodrick, R., 1992, Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns: Alternative Proce-

dures for Inference and Measurement, Review of Financial Studies, 5, 357-386.

[31] Huang, R., 1985, Common Stock Returns and Presidential Elections, Financial Analysts

Journal, March-April.

[32] Johnson, R., W. Chittenden, and G. Jensen, 1999, Presidential Politics, Stocks, Bonds,

Bills, and Inﬂation, Journal of Portfolio Management, Fall.

[33] Kaul, G., 1987, “Stock Returns and Inﬂation: The role of the Monetary Sector,” Journal

of Financial Economics, 18, 253-276.

[34] Keim, D., and R. Stambaugh, 1986, “Predicting Returns in Stock and Bond Markets,”

Journal of Financial Economics, 17, 357-390.

[35] Koenker, R. and K. Hallock, 2000, “Quantile Regression: An Introduction,” Journal of

Economic Perspectives, forthcoming.

[36] Koenker, R., 2000, Quantile Regression, International Encyclopedia of the Social Sci-

ences, Eds. S. Fienberg and J. Kadane, forthcoming.

[37] Lindbeck, A.,1976, Stabilization Policies in Open Economies with Endogenous Politi-

cians, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 1-19.

[38] Newey, W. and K. West, 1987, “A Simple Positive Semi-Deﬁnite, Heteroskedasticity

and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix,” Econometrica, 55, 703-708.

26

[39] Nordhaus, W., 1975, The Political Business Cycle, Review of Economic Studies, 42,

169-90.

[40] Persson, T. and G. Tabellini, 1990, M acroeconomic Policy, Credibility, and Politics,

Churk, Switzerland: Harwood Academic Publishers.

[41] Rogoﬀ, K., 1990, Equilibrium Political Budget Cycles, American Economic Review, 80,

21-36.

[42] Schwert, W., 1990, “Indexes of United States Stock Prices from 1802 to 1987,” Journal

of Business, 63, 399-426.

[43] Siegel, J., 1998, Stocks for the Long Run, Norton, New York.

27

)
0
9
9
1
(

t
r
e
w
h
c
S

d
n
a
P
S
R
C

s
e
t
a
i
c
o
s
s
A
n
o
s
t
o
b
b
I

s
e
t
a
i
c
o
s
s
A
n
o
s
t
o
b
b
I

e
s
a
b
i
t
i
C

P
S
R
C

P
S
R
C

e
c
r
u
o
S

P
S
R
C

P
S
R
C

P
S
R
C

r
a
e
y

s
u
o
i
v
e
r
p

r
e
v
o

s
d
n
e
d
i
v
i
d

e
g
a
r
e
v
a

h
t
i
w
d
e
t
u
p
m
o
c

,
o
i
l
o
f
t
r
o
p

d
e
t
h
g
i
e
w
-
e
u
l
a
v

f
o

o
i
t
a
r

e
c
i
r
p
-
d
n
e
d
i
v
i
d

x
e
d
n
i

e
c
i
r
p

r
e
m
u
s
n
o
c

f
o

e
c
n
e
r
e
ﬀ
i
d

g
o
L

g
o
L

s
n
r
u
t
e
r

y
l
i
a
d

h
t
n
o
m
-
n
i
h
t
i
w
m
o
r
f

d
e
t
u
p
m
o
c

,
s
n
r
u
t
e
r

y
l
h
t
n
o
m

f
o

n
o
i
t
a
i
v
e
d

d
r
a
d
n
a
t
S

l
l
i
b
-
T
h
t
n
o
m
-
3

d
n
a

e
t
o
n
-
T
r
a
e
y
-
0
1

n
o

s
d
l
e
i
y

s
d
n
o
b

d
e
t
a
r
A
A
A
d
n
a
A
A
B
n
o

s
d
l
e
i
y

g
o
l

g
o
l

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

e
c
n
e
r
e
ﬀ
D

i

n
e
e
w
t
e
b

e
c
n
e
r
e
ﬀ
D

i

l
l
i
b
-
T
h
t
n
o
m
-
3

f
o

d
l
e
i
y

g
o
L

o
i
l
o
f
t
r
o
p

d
e
t
h
g
i
e
w
-
y
l
l
a
u
q
e

o
i
l
o
f
t
r
o
p

d
e
t
h
g
i
e
w
-
e
u
l
a
v

j

e
l
i
c
e
d
-
e
z
i
s

f
o

f
o

f
o

n
r
u
t
e
r

n
r
u
t
e
r

n
r
u
t
e
r

g
o
L

g
o
L

g
o
L

R
W
V

R
W
E

j

C
E
D

L
O
V

L
B
T

P
S
T

P
S
D

P
D

F
N

I

R
R

s
n
o
i
t
i

n
ﬁ
e
D
e
l

b
a
i
r
a
V

:
1

e
l

b
a
T

n
o
i
t
i

n
ﬁ
e
D

m
y
n
o
r
c
A

s
e
t
a
i
c
o
s
s
A
n
o
s
t
o
b
b
I

e
g
a
r
e
v
a

g
n
i
v
o
m
h
t
n
o
m
-
2
1

d
e
g
g
a
l

s
t
i

d
n
a

d
l
e
i
y

l
l
i
b
-
T
n
e
e
w
t
e
b

e
c
n
e
r
e
ﬀ
i
d

,
e
t
a
r

t
s
e
r
e
t
n
i

e
v
i
t
a
l
e
R

s
e
i
r
e
s

l
l

A

.
a
t
a
d

e
h
t

f
o

s
e
c
r
u
o
s

e
h
t

s
a

l
l
e
w

s
a

,
r
e
p
a
p

e
h
t

n

i

d
e
s
u

s
e
l
b
a
i
r
a
v

e
h
t

f
o
m
y
n
o
r
c
a

e
h
t

d
n
a

n
o
i
t
i
n
ﬁ
e
d

e
h
t

s
w
o
h
s

e
l
b
a
t

s
i
h
T

:
s
e
t
o
N

t
c
a
x
e

r
o
F

.
)
7
9
9
1
(

h
c
n
e
r
F

d
n
a

a
m
a
F
m
o
r
f

n
e
k
a
t

e
r
a

,
y
t
i
v
e
r
b

r
o
f

e
r
e
h

d
e
t
t
i

m
o

,
s
n
r
u
t
e
r

y
r
t
s
u
d
n

i

8
4

e
h
T

.
y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
f

y
l
h
t
n
o
m

t
a

e
l
b
a
l
i
a
v
a

e
r
a

.
)
7
9
9
1
(

h
c
n
e
r
F

d
n
a

a
m
a
F

o
t

r
e
f
e
r

e
s
a
e
l

p

,
s
o
i
l
o
f
t
r
o
p

e
h
t

f
o

n
o
i
t
c
u
r
t
s
n
o
c

d
n
a

)
e
d
o
c
C

I
S
(

s
e
i
r
t
s
u
d
n
i

e
h
t

f
o

s
n
o
i
t
i
n
ﬁ
e
d

R
E
B
N

e
l
c
y
c

s
s
e
n
i
s
u
b

e
h
t

f
o

s
d
o
i
r
e
p

n
o
i
s
n
a
p
x
e

e
h
t

r
o
f

e
l
b
a
i
r
a
v

y
m
m
u
D

D
R
E
B
N

Table 2: Summary Statistics–Financial and Control Variables

1927-1998 ( 864 obs)

1946-1998 ( 636 obs)

1946-1993 ( 576 obs)

1960-1998 ( 468 obs)

Series

¯X

ˆσ

ˆφ

¯X

ˆσ

ˆφ

¯X

ˆσ

ˆφ

¯X

ˆσ

ˆφ

VWR-TBL
VWR-INF
EWR-TBL
EWR-INF
TBL-INF
VOL

DEC1-TBL
DEC2-TBL
DEC3-TBL
DEC4-TBL
DEC5-TBL
DEC6-TBL
DEC7-TBL
DEC8-TBL
DEC9-TBL
DEC10-TBL

DP
DSP
TSP
INF
NBERD
RR

6.46
7.08
8.76
9.39
0.60
15.59

8.43
7.24
7.77
7.77
7.52
7.75
6.95
7.11
6.95
6.38

-3.07
1.14
1.64
3.08
0.80
0.01

19.20
19.20
25.32
25.25
1.94
0.56

3.29
2.96
2.75
2.56
2.51
2.41
2.31
2.16
2.06
1.81

0.33
0.02
0.04
0.19
0.40
0.03

0.20
0.17
0.25
0.22
0.82
0.87

0.27
0.29
0.22
0.22
0.16
0.22
0.17
0.16
0.20
0.22

0.98
0.97
0.91
0.83
0.88
0.74

6.91
7.47
7.66
8.22
0.55
13.33

6.51
6.56
7.33
7.36
7.26
7.20
6.95
7.29
7.03
7.06

-3.15
0.89
1.56
4.14
0.85
0.04

14.60
14.75
18.14
18.21
1.63
0.36

2.04
1.94
1.90
1.82
1.76
1.71
1.68
1.60
1.52
1.38

0.31
0.01
0.04
0.16
0.36
0.03

0.07
0.14
0.22
0.24
0.79
0.70

0.28
0.22
0.11
0.12
0.09
0.05
0.03
-0.03
0.01
0.11

0.99
0.97
0.89
0.80
0.84
0.76

6.13
6.48
7.83
8.18
0.33
13.33

6.76
6.81
7.45
7.62
7.39
7.37
7.05
7.06
6.68
5.95

-3.09
0.92
1.52
4.34
0.83
0.03

14.64
14.78
18.33
18.42
1.69
0.36

2.08
1.97
1.92
1.84
1.77
1.72
1.68
1.61
1.52
1.38

0.25
0.01
0.04
0.17
0.37
0.03

0.07
0.13
0.25
0.27
0.79
0.68

0.30
0.24
0.14
0.15
0.13
0.08
0.06
-0.01
0.03
0.08

0.98
0.97
0.89
0.80
0.83
0.76

5.18
6.62
6.45
7.90
1.45
13.50

5.26
5.03
6.08
5.93
5.87
5.56
5.27
5.79
5.25
5.34

-3.24
0.99
1.66
4.39
0.86
0.02

15.30
15.38
19.37
19.37
0.99
0.38

2.13
2.04
2.01
1.94
1.87
1.80
1.76
1.69
1.59
1.44

0.28
0.01
0.04
0.11
0.35
0.04

-0.02
0.05
0.21
0.21
0.87
0.70

0.27
0.19
0.06
0.07
0.01
-0.02
-0.03
-0.14
-0.11
0.03

0.99
0.97
0.90
0.91
0.85
0.76

Notes: The table reports the sample average ( ¯X), standard deviation (ˆσ), and the autoregressive coeﬃcient ( ˆφ) of all
ﬁnancial series and control variables used in this study. All returns are in annualized percentage points. A complete
description of the variables and their mneumonics can be found in Table 1. Summary statistics for the 48 industry
portfolio returns are not displayed, in the interest of brevity. For those statistics, please refer to Fama and French
(1997). Summary statistics of the political variables can be found in the text.

Table 3: Average Returns under Republican and Democratic Presidents

A: Signiﬁcance Tests

1927:01-1998:12

1946:01-1998:12

1946:01-1993:12

1960:01-1998:12

VWR-TBL

VWR-INF

EWR-TBL

EWR-INF

TBL-INF

RD
1.69
0.33
0.33

4.25
0.12
0.09

-0.01
0.50
0.46

2.58
0.29
0.25

2.54
0.00
0.00

DD
10.69
0.00
0.00

9.56
0.00
0.00

16.52
0.00
0.00

15.38
0.00
0.00

-1.16
0.02
1.00

Diﬀ
-9.01
0.03
0.02

-5.31
0.13
0.10

-16.52
0.01
0.01

-12.80
0.02
0.01

3.70
0.00
1.00

RD
4.08
0.09
0.05

4.60
0.08
0.06

2.04
0.31
0.28

2.58
0.27
0.23

0.49
0.21
0.05

T/Changes

863/ 7

¯R2

0.01

Diﬀ
-6.51
0.05
0.03

-6.61
0.05
0.05

-13.03
0.01
0.00

-13.09
0.01
0.00

-0.15
0.42
0.38

RD
4.08
0.09
0.08

4.60
0.08
0.04

2.04
0.31
0.25

2.58
0.27
0.23

0.49
0.21
0.05

DD
10.59
0.00
0.00

11.20
0.00
0.00

15.07
0.00
0.00

15.67
0.00
0.00

0.63
0.05
0.05

635/ 7

0.01

B: Robustness Tests

DD
9.47
0.00
0.00

9.53
0.00
0.01

17.71
0.00
0.00

17.73
0.00
0.00

0.06
0.45
0.45

575/ 7

0.01

Diﬀ
-5.40
0.10
0.11

-4.93
0.13
0.14

-15.67
0.00
0.01

-15.15
0.00
0.00

0.43
0.28
0.82

RD
1.46
0.35
0.30

3.30
0.20
0.15

-1.24
0.41
0.62

0.62
0.46
0.46

1.83
0.00
0.00

Diﬀ
-8.40
0.04
0.04

-7.51
0.06
0.06

-16.75
0.01
0.01

-15.82
0.01
0.01

0.84
0.05
1.00

DD
9.86
0.00
0.01

10.81
0.00
0.00

15.50
0.00
0.00

16.44
0.00
0.00

0.99
0.00
0.00

467/ 5

0.01

VWR-TBL

RD
1.69

[ 6.46]
0.08

DD
10.69

[ 6.46]
0.06

Diﬀ
-9.01

[ 0.00]
0.06

RD
4.08

[ 6.91]
0.07

DD
10.59

[ 6.91]
0.07

Diﬀ
-6.51

[ 0.00]
0.06

RD
4.08

DD
9.47

[ 6.13]
0.16

[ 6.13]
0.04

Diﬀ
-5.40

[ 0.00]
0.09

RD
1.46

DD
9.86

[ 5.18]
0.04

[ 5.18]
0.05

Diﬀ
-8.40

[ 0.00]
0.04

VWR-INF

4.25

9.56

-5.31

4.60

11.20

-6.61

4.60

9.53

-4.93

3.30

10.81

-7.51

[ 7.08]
0.18

[ 7.08]
0.15

[ 0.00]
0.17

[ 7.47]
0.06

[ 7.47]
0.14

[ 0.00]
0.08

[ 6.48]
0.14

[ 6.48]
0.09

[ 0.00]
0.12

[ 6.62]
0.08

[ 6.62]
0.11

[ 0.00]
0.09

EWR-TBL

-0.01

16.52

-16.52

2.04

15.07

-13.03

2.04

17.71

-15.67

-1.24

15.50

-16.75

[ 8.76]
0.03

[ 8.76]
0.01

[ 0.00]
0.01

[ 7.66]
0.03

[ 7.66]
0.01

[ 0.00]
0.01

[ 7.83]
0.04

[ 7.83]
0.00

[ 0.00]
0.00

[ 6.45]
0.03

[ 6.45]
0.01

[ 0.00]
0.00

EWR-INF

2.58

15.38

-12.80

2.58

15.67

-13.09

2.58

17.73

-15.15

0.62

16.44

-15.82

[ 9.39]
0.05

[ 9.39]
0.02

[ 0.00]
0.03

[ 8.22]
0.02

[ 8.22]
0.01

[ 0.00]
0.00

[ 8.18]
0.03

[ 8.18]
0.01

[ 0.00]
0.01

[ 7.90]
0.03

[ 7.90]
0.01

[ 0.00]
0.00

TBL-INF

2.54

-1.16

3.70

0.49

0.63

-0.15

0.49

0.06

0.43

1.83

0.99

0.84

[ 0.60]
0.03

[ 0.60]
0.02

[ 0.00]
0.02

[ 0.55]
0.12

[ 0.55]
0.13

[ 0.00]
0.45

[ 0.33]
0.27

[ 0.33]
0.06

[ 0.00]
0.36

[ 1.45]
0.35

[ 1.45]
0.19

[ 0.00]
0.29

Notes: See next page.

Notes: Panel A reports mean returns of VWR-TBL, VWR-INF, EWR-TBL, EWR-INF and the real interest rate,
TBL-INF, during Republican (RD) and Democratic (DD) presidential terms. All rates are represented as annualized
percentage points. The diﬀerence between Republican and Democratic terms, displayed in column “Diﬀ”, is equivalent
to running returns on a constant and a Republican index variable, which corresponds to equation (1) in the text. The
numbers below the coeﬃcients in the RD and DD columms represent p-values of a t-test under the null hypothesis
that the estimates are not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero. The ﬁrst number is the p-value of the test conducted using
Newey-West (1988) heteroskedasticity and serial-correlation robust t-statistics. The second number is the p-value of
the test conducted using a conditional bootstrap t-statistic. The p-values below the coeﬃcients in the “Diﬀ” column
are obtained from the Newey-West and conditional bootstrap t-statistics under the null that there is no diﬀerence in
returns during Republican and Democratic regimes. The rows “T/Changes” display the number of observations and
the number of party changes during the estimation period. The rows “ ¯R2” display the average R2 obtained in the
regressions. Panel B reports the results from a robustness exercise, designed to test whether the results obtained in
Panel A might be due to small sample biases. The maintained null hypothesis is of no relationship between returns
and political variables. To ﬁnd the small sample distribution of the t-statistic, under the null, we draw 10,000 samples
of T observations by resampling independently from the returns and political variables series. Given the samples, we
can compute the bootstrapped distributions and p-values of the t-statistics of interest. In Panel B, the numbers in
square brackets are the estimates obtained from this randomization-bootstrap. The second numbers represent the
p-values from the randomization-bootstrap.

Table 4: Average Returns under Republican and Democratic Presidents, Controlling for
Business-Cycle Variables

A: Signiﬁcance Tests

1927:01-1998:12

1946:01-1998:12

1946:01-1993:12

1960:01-1998:12

VWR-TBL

VWR-INF

EWR-TBL

EWR-INF

TBL-INF

RD
2.45

0.20
0.24

4.52

0.06
0.09

0.61

0.44
0.44

2.70

0.24
0.28

2.05

0.00
0.00

DD
10.02

0.00
0.00

9.33

0.00
0.00

Diﬀ
-7.57

0.04
0.05

-4.81

0.13
0.17

RD
2.39

0.19
0.17

2.56

0.19
0.16

DD
12.93

0.00
0.00

Diﬀ
-10.53

0.00
0.01

14.03

-11.47

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

15.97

-15.35

-1.34

19.76

-21.10

0.00
0.00

0.01
0.01

0.35
0.35

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

15.26

-12.56

-1.15

20.84

-21.99

0.00
0.00

-0.72

0.07
0.01

0.02
0.02

2.77

0.00
0.00

0.38
0.38

0.12

0.42
0.34

0.00
0.00

-1.02

0.12
0.02

0.00
0.00

1.14

0.01
0.00

635/ 7

0.08

RD
3.82

0.07
0.08

3.89

0.09
0.08

0.47

0.44
0.46

0.55

0.44
0.41

0.02

0.49
0.45

T/Changes

863/ 7

¯R2

0.06

B: Robustness Tests

VWR-TBL

RD
2.45

[ 6.54]
0.12

DD
10.02

[ 6.54]
0.11

Diﬀ
-7.57

[ 0.00]
0.13

RD
2.39

[ 8.17]
0.03

DD
12.93

[ 8.17]
0.05

Diﬀ
-10.53

[ 0.00]
0.04

RD
3.82

[ 7.32]
0.12

VWR-INF

4.52

9.33

-4.81

2.56

14.03

-11.47

3.89

[ 7.05]
0.24

[ 7.05]
0.22

[ 0.00]
0.23

[ 9.10]
0.03

[ 9.10]
0.06

[ 0.00]
0.03

[ 8.06]
0.09

DD
9.93

0.00
0.00

Diﬀ
-6.11

0.07
0.09

RD
-2.51

0.21
0.20

DD
14.39

0.00
0.00

Diﬀ
-16.90

0.00
0.00

10.80

-6.91

-0.95

15.67

-16.63

0.00
0.00

0.06
0.05

0.38
0.39

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

20.53

-20.06

-8.91

24.26

-33.17

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.02
0.04

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

21.35

-20.80

-7.31

25.50

-32.81

0.00
0.00

0.89

0.04
0.02

575/ 7

0.09

DD
9.93

[ 7.32]
0.19

10.80

[ 8.06]
0.21

0.00
0.00

-0.86

0.17
0.06

0.04
0.06

1.53

0.00
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.20

0.37
0.27

0.00
0.00

1.33

0.00
0.00

467/ 5

0.10

Diﬀ
-6.11

[ 0.00]
0.15

RD
-2.51

[ 5.93]
0.05

DD
14.39

[ 5.93]
0.04

Diﬀ
-16.90

[ 0.00]
0.02

-6.91

-0.95

15.67

-16.63

[ 0.00]
0.13

[ 7.34]
0.05

[ 7.34]
0.03

[ 0.00]
0.03

EWR-TBL

0.61

15.97

-15.35

-1.34

19.76

-21.10

0.47

20.53

-20.06

-8.91

24.26

-33.17

[ 8.35]
0.06

[ 8.35]
0.04

[ 0.00]
0.04

[ 8.59]
0.01

[ 8.59]
0.01

[ 0.00]
0.00

[ 9.99]
0.04

[ 9.99]
0.02

[ 0.00]
0.01

[ 6.95]
0.02

[ 6.95]
0.01

[ 0.00]
0.00

EWR-INF

2.70

15.26

-12.56

-1.15

20.84

-21.99

0.55

21.35

-20.80

-7.31

25.50

-32.81

[ 8.75]
0.10

[ 8.75]
0.05

[ 0.00]
0.07

[ 9.78]
0.01

[ 9.78]
0.01

[ 0.00]
0.00

[ 10.86]
0.02

[ 10.86]
0.02

[ 0.00]
0.01

[ 8.53]
0.02

[ 8.53]
0.01

[ 0.00]
0.00

TBL-INF

2.05

-0.72

2.77

0.12

1.14

-1.02

0.02

0.89

-0.86

1.53

1.33

0.20

[ 0.51]
0.04

[ 0.51]
0.04

[ 0.00]
0.04

[ 1.04]
0.05

[ 1.04]
0.49

[ 0.00]
0.21

[ 0.78]
0.09

[ 0.78]
0.49

[ 0.00]
0.23

[ 1.45]
0.48

[ 1.45]
0.44

[ 0.00]
0.45

Notes: See next page.

Notes: The table displays the results from regressing returns on political variables and other control variables. The
controls, denoted by Xt in the paper are the log dividend price ratio (DP), the default spread (DSP), the term spread
(TSP), the inﬂation rate (INF), the relative rate (RR), and the NBER business-cycle index variable (NBERD).
Panel A reports mean returns of VWR-TBL, VWR-INF, EWR-TBL, EWR-INF and the real interest rate, TBL-INF,
during Republican (RD) and Democratic (DD) presidential terms, while controlling for Xt. All rates are represented
as annualized percentage points. To make the means directly comparable with those in Panel 3, all conditioning
variables in Xt are demeaned. The diﬀerence between Republican and Democratic terms, displayed in column “Diﬀ”,
is equivalent to running returns on a constant, a Republican index variable, and Xt which corresponds to equation (4)
in the text. The numbers below the coeﬃcients in the RD and DD columms represent p-values of a t-test under the
null hypothesis that the estimates are not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero. The ﬁrst number is the p-value of the test
conducted using Newey-West (1987) heteroskedasticity and serial-correlation robust t-statistics. The second number
is the p-value of the test conducted using a conditional bootstrap t-statistic. The p-values below the coeﬃcients in
the “Diﬀ” column are obtained from the Newey-West and conditional bootstrap t-statistics under the null that there
is no diﬀerence in returns during Republican and Democratic regimes. The rows “T/Changes” display the number
of observations and the number of party changes during the estimation period. The rows “ ¯R2” display the average
R2 obtained in the regressions. Panel B reports the results from a robustness exercise, designed to test whether the
results obtained in Panel A might be due to small sample biases. The maintained null hypothesis is of no relationship
between returns and political variables. To ﬁnd the small sample distribution of the t-statistic, under the null, we
draw 10,000 samples of T observations by resampling independently from the returns, the political variables, and
the controls. Given the samples, we can compute the bootstrapped distributions and p-values of the t-statistics of
interest. In Panel B, the numbers in square brackets are the estimates obtained from this randomization-bootstrap.
The second numbers represent the p-values from the randomization-bootstrap.

Table 5: Diﬀerence in Returns Before and After Presidential Elections

MD(0)

1-MD(0)

Diﬀ MD(1)

1-MD(1)

Diﬀ MD(3)

1-MD(3)

Diﬀ MD(6)

1-MD(6)

Diﬀ

VWR-TBL

VWR-INF

EWR-TBL

EWR-INF

TBL-INF

T

VWR-TBL

VWR-INF

EWR-TBL

EWR-INF

TBL-INF

T

VWR-TBL

VWR-INF

EWR-TBL

EWR-INF

TBL-INF

T

23.00
0.05
0.06
25.95
0.03
0.07
21.37
0.09
0.14
24.37
0.05
0.11
3.06
0.00
0.04

23.93
0.06
0.06
26.96
0.03
0.05
16.91
0.16
0.16
19.98
0.11
0.15
3.15
0.00
0.04

19.95
0.11
0.08
23.03
0.07
0.07
16.27
0.19
0.15
19.40
0.13
0.14
3.19
0.00
0.05

16.88
0.12
0.14
19.28
0.08
0.13
12.88
0.21
0.22
15.32
0.16
0.21
2.54
0.00
0.05

17.48
0.13
0.12
20.01
0.09
0.10
9.60
0.29
0.29
12.17
0.23
0.27
2.65
0.00
0.06

14.24
0.19
0.15
17.03
0.14
0.14
8.80
0.32
0.29
11.63
0.26
0.24
2.92
0.00
0.07

13.00
0.09
0.13
15.39
0.05
0.09
7.76
0.26
0.30
10.19
0.19
0.24
2.45
0.00
0.02

15.17
0.02
0.07
17.13
0.00
0.06
6.95
0.21
0.27
8.95
0.13
0.22
2.01
0.01
0.06

12.96
0.04
0.10
14.93
0.01
0.09
7.73
0.20
0.26
9.74
0.13
0.20
2.02
0.01
0.06

6.11
0.00
0.00
6.67
0.00
0.00
8.49
0.01
0.00
9.05
0.00
0.00
0.52
0.09
0.02

863

6.45
0.00
0.00
6.96
0.00
0.00
7.30
0.01
0.00
7.81
0.00
0.00
0.49
0.10
0.02

635

5.71
0.01
0.01
6.01
0.01
0.00
7.47
0.01
0.00
7.76
0.01
0.00
0.27
0.26
0.15

575

Notes: See Next Page.

1927:1–1998:12

6.82
0.12
0.27
8.69
0.08
0.22
-1.04
0.21
0.44
0.86
0.16
0.47
1.95
0.00
0.04

6.18
0.01
0.00
6.71
0.00
0.00
8.81
0.01
0.00
9.33
0.00
0.00
0.50
0.10
0.02

863

1946:1–1998:12

8.73
0.13
0.20
10.18
0.09
0.15
-0.57
0.29
0.48
0.93
0.23
0.44
1.53
0.00
0.09

6.45
0.00
0.00
6.95
0.00
0.00
7.52
0.01
0.00
8.02
0.00
0.00
0.48
0.11
0.03

635

1946:1–1993:12

7.26
0.19
0.27
8.94
0.14
0.21
0.08
0.32
0.47
1.81
0.26
0.43
1.76
0.00
0.08

5.71
0.01
0.00
5.99
0.01
0.00
7.65
0.01
0.00
7.93
0.01
0.00
0.26
0.27
0.12

575

16.01
0.00
0.03
17.69
0.00
0.01
17.57
0.02
0.06
19.26
0.01
0.04
1.73
0.00
0.02

10.23
0.03
0.07
11.80
0.02
0.06
6.49
0.16
0.22
8.08
0.10
0.17
1.64
0.00
0.02

7.46
0.08
0.14
9.02
0.05
0.10
5.53
0.22
0.27
7.10
0.15
0.24
1.61
0.00
0.02

10.41
0.12
0.10
11.59
0.08
0.10
9.61
0.21
0.21
10.79
0.16
0.16
1.26
0.00
0.06

3.73
0.13
0.29
4.83
0.09
0.27
-1.10
0.29
0.43
0.03
0.23
0.49
1.19
0.00
0.07

1.59
0.19
0.42
2.90
0.14
0.33
-2.32
0.32
0.42
-0.99
0.26
0.44
1.39
0.00
0.05

12.50
0.00
0.01
13.37
0.00
0.01
13.14
0.04
0.03
14.03
0.03
0.03
0.89
0.06
0.07

9.30
0.01
0.05
9.97
0.00
0.03
5.26
0.17
0.21
5.95
0.13
0.19
0.71
0.10
0.11

8.71
0.01
0.06
9.23
0.01
0.05
5.79
0.16
0.20
6.33
0.13
0.20
0.55
0.17
0.18

5.60
0.01
0.01
6.10
0.01
0.01
7.96
0.01
0.00
8.47
0.01
0.00
0.47
0.12
0.01

863

6.50
0.00
0.00
6.97
0.00
0.00
7.59
0.01
0.00
8.06
0.01
0.00
0.45
0.14
0.05

635

5.88
0.01
0.00
6.12
0.01
0.00
7.85
0.01
0.00
8.09
0.01
0.00
0.22
0.31
0.21

575

7.06
0.12
0.14
7.38
0.08
0.10
5.13
0.21
0.28
5.45
0.16
0.24
0.37
0.00
0.26

2.91
0.13
0.32
3.04
0.09
0.29
-2.61
0.29
0.38
-2.47
0.23
0.36
0.19
0.00
0.33

3.16
0.19
0.32
3.36
0.14
0.28
-2.18
0.32
0.36
-1.97
0.26
0.37
0.26
0.00
0.32

5.44
0.02
0.02
5.99
0.01
0.00
8.01
0.01
0.01
8.57
0.01
0.01
0.52
0.11
0.01

863

6.39
0.00
0.00
6.93
0.00
0.00
7.87
0.01
0.01
8.41
0.01
0.00
0.52
0.11
0.02

635

5.55
0.02
0.00
5.87
0.01
0.00
7.97
0.01
0.00
8.29
0.01
0.00
0.29
0.27
0.13

575

Table 5: Diﬀerence in Returns Before and After Presidential Elections (Cont’d)

MD(0)

1-MD(0)

Diﬀ MD(1)

1-MD(1)

Diﬀ MD(3)

1-MD(3)

Diﬀ MD(6)

1-MD(6)

Diﬀ

VWR-TBL

VWR-INF

EWR-TBL

EWR-INF

TBL-INF

T

35.15
0.00
0.02
37.69
0.00
0.02
28.08
0.03
0.09
30.69
0.01
0.07
2.70
0.00
0.01

4.73
0.03
0.02
6.13
0.01
0.00
6.10
0.05
0.02
7.51
0.02
0.01
1.41
0.00
0.00

467

30.42
0.01
0.04
31.56
0.01
0.05
21.98
0.07
0.14
23.18
0.05
0.12
1.29
0.05
0.10

18.41
0.01
0.09
19.96
0.00
0.07
9.54
0.17
0.25
11.15
0.11
0.18
1.64
0.03
0.04

1960:1–1998:12

13.61
0.01
0.15
13.74
0.01
0.15
3.10
0.07
0.37
3.28
0.05
0.34
0.21
0.05
0.40

16.87
0.00
0.02
18.31
0.00
0.01
12.39
0.05
0.11
13.86
0.03
0.11
1.53
0.01
0.00

4.80
0.03
0.04
6.22
0.01
0.00
6.44
0.04
0.03
7.87
0.02
0.01
1.43
0.00
0.00

467

12.57
0.01
0.08
12.57
0.01
0.08
6.37
0.07
0.26
6.40
0.05
0.28
0.10
0.05
0.46

11.99
0.00
0.03
13.23
0.00
0.02
7.59
0.12
0.16
8.85
0.08
0.15
1.29
0.00
0.00

4.30
0.06
0.05
5.73
0.02
0.02
6.03
0.06
0.03
7.46
0.03
0.02
1.43
0.00
0.00

467

7.78
0.01
0.13
7.55
0.01
0.16
1.20
0.07
0.40
0.99
0.05
0.50
-0.17
0.05
0.34

4.21
0.07
0.06
5.68
0.03
0.01
6.39
0.06
0.02
7.86
0.03
0.01
1.46
0.00
0.00

467

Notes: The table displays results from testing whether returns are signiﬁcantly higher several months prior to an
election. The regression is: Rt+1 = α1M D(j)t + α2 [1 − M D(j)t] + εt+1, j = 0, 1, 3, 6, where M D(j)t equals to 1 in
the period from j months prior to an election, and 0 otherwise. This regression tests the hypothesis that a diﬀerence
in returns is observed prior to elections. The test of the null hypothesis α1 = α2 is displayed in columns “Diﬀ”.
This test can be motivated by “opportunistic” models of political behavior (Nordhaus (1975), Rogoﬀ (1990)), where
policymakers choose policies that maximize ther chances to stay in oﬃce. Similar results were obtained when the
usual controls were included in the regression. As in the previous tables, the ﬁrst number below the estimates is the
p-value of the test conducted using Newey-West (1987) heteroskedasticity and serial-correlation robust t-statistics.
The second number is the p-value of the test conducted using a conditional bootstrap t-statistic. The p-values below
the coeﬃcients in the “Diﬀ” column are obtained from the Newey-West and conditional bootstrap t-statistics under
the null that there is no diﬀerence in returns during Republican and Democratic regimes.

Table 6: Diﬀerence in Returns Before and After Presidential Elections, by Political Party,
Controlling for Business Cycle Variables

DBD(0) RBD(0) DAD(0) RAD(0)

Diﬀ1

Diﬀ2 DBD(1) RBD(1) DAD(1) RAD(1)

Diﬀ1

Diﬀ2

VWR-TBL

VWR-INF

EWR-TBL

EWR-INF

TBL-INF

T

VWR-TBL

VWR-INF

EWR-TBL

EWR-INF

TBL-INF

2.22
0.45
0.45
2.83
0.44
0.40
7.31
0.38
0.37
7.92
0.37
0.34
0.57
0.19
0.25

6.35
0.41
0.35
7.16
0.40
0.34
4.30
0.44
0.42
5.12
0.43
0.43
0.78
0.20
0.19

44.87
0.01
0.03
47.23
0.00
0.02
36.24
0.03
0.08
38.68
0.02
0.10
2.54
0.00
0.02

32.65
0.04
0.04
33.56
0.03
0.05
20.90
0.15
0.17
21.90
0.13
0.15
1.01
0.10
0.13

10.29
0.00
0.00
9.60
0.00
0.00
16.23
0.00
0.00
15.52
0.00
0.00
-0.72
0.01
0.00

863

13.00
0.00
0.00
13.93
0.00
0.00
20.07
0.00
0.00
20.97
0.00
0.00
0.96
0.00
0.00

T

635

VWR-TBL

VWR-INF

EWR-TBL

EWR-INF

TBL-INF

-6.05
0.42
0.41
-5.27
0.43
0.39
0.26
0.50
0.48
1.01
0.49
0.47
0.70
0.26
0.22

33.35
0.03
0.04
34.11
0.03
0.04
22.70
0.13
0.15
23.55
0.11
0.11
0.86
0.14
0.17

10.34
0.00
0.00
11.05
0.00
0.00
21.05
0.00
0.00
21.72
0.00
0.00
0.73
0.00
0.00

1.49
0.31
0.36
3.52
0.12
0.16
-0.17
0.48
0.48
1.87
0.31
0.39
2.00
0.00
0.00

1.87
0.24
0.24
2.15
0.22
0.19
-1.74
0.31
0.30
-1.43
0.34
0.33
0.24
0.25
0.06

3.25
0.11
0.12
3.38
0.10
0.10
0.03
0.50
0.47
0.19
0.48
0.49
0.10
0.39
0.29

1927:1–1998:12

-42.65
0.05
0.06
-44.40
0.04
0.09
-28.94
0.17
0.19
-30.76
0.15
0.23
-1.97
0.04
0.11

8.80
0.02
0.03
6.08
0.08
0.09
16.40
0.00
0.00
13.65
0.01
0.01
-2.72
0.00
0.00

10.45
0.15
0.21
11.08
0.13
0.22
13.29
0.15
0.21
13.92
0.14
0.25
0.61
0.11
0.20

1946:1–1998:12

-26.30
0.22
0.17
-26.40
0.21
0.16
-16.60
0.33
0.29
-16.79
0.32
0.26
-0.23
0.43
0.42

11.14
0.00
0.00
11.78
0.00
0.00
21.81
0.00
0.00
22.40
0.00
0.00
0.72
0.06
0.00

1946:1–1993:12

-39.41
0.14
0.08
-39.38
0.13
0.09
-22.44
0.30
0.27
-22.54
0.29
0.25
-0.16
0.45
0.45

7.09
0.04
0.07
7.66
0.04
0.05
21.02
0.00
0.00
21.53
0.00
0.00
0.63
0.10
0.01

6.28
0.35
0.28
7.07
0.32
0.30
5.13
0.38
0.36
5.90
0.36
0.35
0.78
0.08
0.16

-1.10
0.48
0.47
-0.34
0.49
0.50
6.17
0.38
0.34
6.88
0.37
0.39
0.71
0.14
0.21

15.79
0.15
0.16
17.33
0.12
0.13
3.83
0.42
0.43
5.43
0.38
0.38
1.61
0.01
0.03

22.05
0.02
0.05
22.72
0.01
0.04
9.76
0.20
0.26
10.52
0.17
0.23
0.73
0.04
0.12

23.63
0.01
0.03
24.16
0.01
0.04
11.80
0.15
0.23
12.41
0.13
0.22
0.59
0.08
0.17

10.04
0.00
0.00
9.32
0.00
0.00
16.08
0.00
0.00
15.34
0.00
0.00
-0.75
0.01
0.00

863

13.17
0.00
0.00
14.10
0.00
0.00
20.36
0.00
0.00
21.27
0.00
0.00
0.97
0.00
0.00

635

10.44
0.00
0.00
11.15
0.00
0.00
21.19
0.00
0.00
21.86
0.00
0.00
0.73
0.00
0.00

1.82
0.28
0.30
3.88
0.11
0.12
0.48
0.45
0.45
2.56
0.27
0.26
2.03
0.00
0.00

1.59
0.28
0.30
1.87
0.25
0.25
-1.79
0.31
0.25
-1.49
0.34
0.33
0.23
0.26
0.05

2.98
0.14
0.14
3.11
0.13
0.12
-0.01
0.50
0.48
0.14
0.48
0.47
0.09
0.40
0.27

-5.35
0.37
0.38
-6.24
0.35
0.39
9.46
0.31
0.38
8.49
0.32
0.38
-1.00
0.10
0.18

-15.76
0.22
0.24
-15.65
0.21
0.19
-4.63
0.42
0.44
-4.62
0.42
0.40
0.05
0.47
0.47

-24.72
0.12
0.12
-24.51
0.12
0.12
-5.62
0.41
0.40
-5.54
0.41
0.43
0.12
0.43
0.46

8.23
0.03
0.04
5.44
0.11
0.11
15.59
0.01
0.00
12.78
0.02
0.02
-2.78
0.00
0.00

11.58
0.00
0.00
12.23
0.00
0.01
22.15
0.00
0.00
22.76
0.00
0.00
0.74
0.06
0.00

7.46
0.04
0.04
8.04
0.03
0.04
21.20
0.00
0.00
21.72
0.00
0.00
0.64
0.10
0.01

T

575

575

Notes: See Next Page.

Table 6: Diﬀerence in Returns Before and After Presidential Elections, by Political Party,
Controlling for Business Cycle Variables (Cont’d)

DBD(0) RBD(0) DAD(0) RAD(0) Diﬀ1

Diﬀ2 DBD(1) RBD(1) DAD(1) RAD(1) Diﬀ1

Diﬀ2

VWR-TBL

VWR-INF

EWR-TBL

EWR-INF

TBL-INF

33.14
0.01
0.06
33.60
0.00
0.09
36.64
0.00
0.08
37.09
0.00
0.09
0.52
0.22
0.27

30.22
0.10
0.08
31.59
0.08
0.09
14.64
0.30
0.26
16.15
0.27
0.26
1.56
0.08
0.03

13.81
0.00
0.00
15.02
0.00
0.00
23.86
0.00
0.00
25.03
0.00
0.00
1.25
0.00
0.00

1960:1–1998:12

2.92
0.46
0.45
2.01
0.47
0.50
21.99
0.23
0.32
20.94
0.23
0.28
-1.04
0.21
0.19

16.87
0.00
0.00
16.43
0.00
0.00
33.16
0.00
0.00
32.65
0.00
0.00
-0.36
0.19
0.05

22.96
0.00
0.08
23.55
0.00
0.07
26.48
0.00
0.08
27.04
0.00
0.10
0.65
0.06
0.18

-3.06
0.16
0.20
-1.42
0.32
0.32
-9.30
0.01
0.03
-7.62
0.03
0.05
1.61
0.00
0.00

17.68
0.09
0.10
18.93
0.06
0.12
2.21
0.44
0.41
3.57
0.40
0.42
1.37
0.02
0.01

13.91
0.00
0.00
15.13
0.00
0.00
24.07
0.00
0.00
25.25
0.00
0.00
1.26
0.00
0.00

-3.35
0.15
0.17
-1.69
0.30
0.30
-9.34
0.01
0.02
-7.65
0.04
0.05
1.62
0.00
0.00

5.28
0.37
0.39
4.62
0.38
0.37
24.27
0.08
0.20
23.47
0.08
0.20
-0.72
0.17
0.23

17.27
0.00
0.00
16.83
0.00
0.00
33.41
0.00
0.00
32.89
0.00
0.00
-0.36
0.20
0.06

T

467

467

Notes: The table displays the results from the regression: Rt+1 = α1DBD(j)t + α2RBD (j)t + α3DAD (j)t +
α4RAD (j)t + β(cid:1)Xt + εt+1, j = 0, 1 where the dummy variables DBD, RBD, DAD, and RAD are deﬁned in Section 2
of the text and Xt is a vector with the usual control variables. This regression tests the hypothesis that a diﬀerence
in returns betweeen Democrats and Republicans is observed only prior to elections (α1 = α2), or only immediately
after the elections, (α3 = α4). The tests of the null hypotheses α1 = α2 and α3 = α4 are displayed in columns “Diﬀ1”
and “Diﬀ 2”, respectively. As above, the ﬁrst number below the estimates is the p-value of the test conducted using
Newey-West (1987) heteroskedasticity and serial-correlation robust t-statistics. The second number is the p-value of
the test conducted using a conditional bootstrap t-statistic. The p-values below the coeﬃcients in the “Diﬀ1” and
“Diﬀ2” columns are obtained from the Newey-West and conditional bootstrap t-statistics under the null that there
is no diﬀerence in returns during the respective periods. The diﬀerence in returns, while insigniﬁcant right before
elections, is signiﬁcant immediately after elections. During the ﬁrst two months after the election, returns under
Democrats are positive, while returns under Republicans are signiﬁcantly (economically and statistically) negative.

Table 7: Volatility during Republican and Democratic Presidential Terms

Period

RD

DD

Diﬀ

T

R2

1927:1 –1998:12

1946:1 –1998:12

1946:1 –1993:12

1960:1 –1998:12

16.347
0.00
0.02

14.478
0.00
0.00

14.478
0.00
0.00

15.103
0.00
0.01

14.940
0.00
0.00

11.707
0.00
0.00

11.235
0.00
0.00

11.662
0.00
0.00

1.408
0.14
0.06

2.771
0.00
0.08

3.244
0.00
0.18

3.440
0.00
0.09

863

0.003

635

0.041

575

0.053

467

0.057

Notes: Table 7 displays the results from the regression: V OLt = α1RDt + α2DDt + εt. The test results of the null
hypothesis that volatility is constant during the tenure of Democrats and Republicans, or α1 = α2, are displayed in
column “Diﬀ”. The ﬁrst number below the estimates is the p-value of the test conducted using Newey-West (1987)
heteroskedasticity and serial-correlation robust t-statistics. The second number is the p-value of the test conducted
using a conditional bootstrap t-statistic. The p-values below the coeﬃcient in the “Diﬀ” column is obtained from
the Newey-West and conditional bootstrap t-statistics under the null that there is no diﬀerence in volatility during
Republican and Democratic regimes. It is interesting to investigate whether the higher excess returns under Democrats
are merely compensation for risk, in which case, we would have α2 > α1. The results do not support this conjecture.
On the contrary, market volatility seems to be lower under Democratic regimes, even after controlling for other
covariates.

Table 8: Volatility during Republican and Democratic Presidential Terms, Controlling for
Business Cycle Variables

Period

RD

DD

DP

DSP

TSP

NBERD

RR

Diﬀ

T

R2

1927:1 –1998:12

15.26
0.00
0.01

15.90
0.00
0.00

-2.61
0.03
0.09

9858.18
0.00
0.06

-500.64
0.21
1.00

1946:1 –1998:12

14.16
0.00
0.00

12.15
0.00
0.00

-1.98
0.07
0.03

2824.88
0.01
0.01

-300.58
0.27
0.99

1946:1 –1993:12

14.21
0.00
0.00

11.72
0.00
0.00

1.10
0.21
0.00

2499.89
0.02
0.01

157.31
0.39
0.99

-5.93
0.00
0.00

-3.92
0.00
0.00

-3.89
0.00
0.00

1960:1 –1998:12

14.26
0.00
0.05

12.62
0.00
0.00

-2.73
0.17
0.00

1495.15
0.20
0.00

0.02
0.24
0.00

224.80
0.30
1.00

-6.21
0.00
0.07

1155.24
0.04
1.00

-0.63
0.22
0.14

863

0.38

656.40
0.15
1.00

1145.20
0.06
1.00

635

0.10

575

0.12

467

0.15

2.00
0.00
0.01

2.49
0.00
0.07

1.64
0.05
0.01

Notes: Table 8 displays the results from the regression: V OLt = α1RDt + α2DDt + γ(cid:1)Xt + εt where Xt represents
the control variables DP, DSP, TSP, NBERD, and RR. The test results of the null hypothesis that volatility is
constant during the tenure of Democrats and Republicans, or α1 = α2, are displayed in column “Diﬀ”. As above,
the ﬁrst number below the estimates is the p-value of the test conducted using Newey-West (1987) heteroskedasticity
and serial-correlation robust t-statistics. The second number is the p-value of the test conducted using a conditional
bootstrap t-statistic. The p-values below the coeﬃcient in the “Diﬀ” column is obtained from the Newey-West
and conditional bootstrap t-statistics under the null that there is no diﬀerence in volatility during Republican and
Democratic regimes. It is interesting to investigate whether the higher excess returns under Democrats are merely
compensation for risk, in which case, we would have α2 > α1. The results do not support this conjecture. On the
contrary, market volatility seems to be lower under Democratic regimes, even after controlling for other covariates.

Table 9: Average Returns of Size-Decile Portfolios under Republican and Democratic Presi-
dents

A: Signiﬁcance Tests B: Robustness Tests

RD

DD

Diﬀ

RD

DD

Diﬀ

1927. 1–1998.12

DEC1-TBL

-2.86

18.40

-21.25

-2.86

18.40

-21.25

0.31

0.68

0.00

0.00

0.01

0.00

[ 8.43]

[ 8.43]

[ 0.00]

0.03

0.01

0.02

DEC2-TBL

-2.47

15.78

-18.25

-2.47

15.78

-18.25

0.32

0.68

0.00

0.00

0.01

0.00

[ 7.24]

[ 7.24]

[ 0.00]

0.04

0.02

0.03

DEC3-TBL

-1.22

15.70

-16.92

-1.22

15.70

-16.92

0.40

0.60

0.00

0.00

0.01

0.00

[ 7.77]

[ 7.77]

[ 0.00]

0.04

0.02

0.02

DEC4-TBL

-0.09

14.70

-14.79

-0.09

14.70

-14.79

0.49

0.50

0.00

0.00

0.01

0.00

[ 7.77]

[ 7.77]

[ 0.00]

0.04

0.02

0.02

DEC5-TBL

-0.13

14.30

-14.43

-0.13

14.30

-14.43

DEC6-TBL

DEC7-TBL

DEC8-TBL

DEC9-TBL

DEC10-TBL

0.49

0.51

1.26

0.39

0.38

0.99

0.41

0.41

1.75

0.33

0.31

1.87

0.32

0.27

2.31

0.26

0.23

0.00

0.00

0.01

0.00

[ 7.52]

[ 7.52]

[ 0.00]

0.04

0.02

0.02

13.48

-12.22

1.26

13.48

-12.22

0.00

0.00

0.02

0.02

[ 7.75]

[ 7.75]

[ 0.00]

0.07

0.03

0.04

12.20

-11.21

0.99

12.20

-11.21

0.00

0.00

0.02

0.02

[ 6.95]

[ 6.95]

[ 0.00]

0.06

0.03

0.04

11.84

-10.09

1.75

11.84

-10.09

0.00

0.00

0.03

0.02

[ 7.11]

[ 7.11]

[ 0.00]

0.08

0.04

0.05

11.45

-9.58

1.87

11.45

-9.58

0.00

0.00

0.03

0.03

[ 6.95]

[ 6.95]

[ 0.00]

0.07

0.05

0.06

10.01

-7.71

2.31

10.01

-7.71

0.00

0.00

0.04

0.05

[ 6.38]

[ 6.38]

[ 0.00]

0.10

0.09

0.10

T/Changes

863/ 7

¯R2

0.01

Notes: See next page.

Notes: The table reports mean excess returns of the size decile portfolios (DEC1=smallest and DEC10=largest)
during Republican (RD) and Democratic (DD) presidential terms. The monotonic relationship is strikingly clear in
the data; smaller companies stocks have higher returns under Democrats. All rates are represented as annualized
percentage points. The diﬀerence between Republican and Democratic terms, displayed in column “Diﬀ”, is equivalent
to running excess returns on a constant and a Republican dummy variable, which corresponds to equation (1) in the
text. Panel A presents the results from the statistical inference. The numbers below the coeﬃcients in the RD and
DD columms represent p-values of a t-test under the null hypothesis that the estimates are not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent
from zero. The ﬁrst number is the p-value of the test conducted using Newey-West (1987) heteroskedasticity and
serial-correlation robust t-statistics. The second number is the p-value of the test conducted using a conditional
bootstrap t-statistic. The p-values below the coeﬃcients in the “Diﬀ” column are obtained from the Newey-West
and conditional bootstrap t-statistics under the null that there is no diﬀerence in returns during Republican and
Democratic regimes. The rows “T/Changes” display the number of observations and the number of party changes
during the estimation period. The rows “ ¯R2” display the average R2 obtained in the regressions. Panel B reports the
results from a robustness exercise, designed to test whether the results obtained in Panel A might be due to small
sample biases (similar to Table 3). The maintained null hypothesis is of no relationship between the size portfolio
returns and political variables. To ﬁnd the small sample distribution of the t-statistic, under the null, we draw 10,000
samples of T observations by resampling independently from the returns and political variables series. Given the
In Panel B,
samples, we can compute the bootstrapped distributions and p-values of the t-statistics of interest.
the numbers in square brackets are the estimates obtained from this randomization-bootstrap. The second numbers
represent the p-values from the randomization-bootstrap.

s
n
r
u
t
e
R
t
e
k
r
a
M

r
o
f

g
n

i
l
l
o
r
t
n
o
C

,
s
t
n
e
d

i
s
e
r
P
c
i
t
a
r
c
o
m
e
D
d
n
a

n
a
c
i
l

b
u
p
e
R
r
e
d
n
u

s
n
r
u
t
e
R
e
l
i
c
e
D
-
e
z
i

S

f
o

s
n
r
u
t
e
R
e
g
a
r
e
v
A

:
0
1

e
l

b
a
T

s
t
s
e
T
e
c
n
a
c
ﬁ

i

n
g
i

S

2
1
.
8
9
9
1
–
1
.
0
6
9
1

2
1
.
3
9
9
1
–
1
.
6
4
9
1

2
1
.
8
9
9
1
–
1
.
5
4
9
1

2
1
.
8
9
9
1
–
1
.
7
2
9
1

i

ﬀ
D

7
8
.
5
1
-

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

4
2
.
0
1
-

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

1
7
.
8
-

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

6
0
.
6
-

2
0
.
0

1
0
.
0

2
8
.
5
-

1
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

1
4
.
3
-

6
0
.
0

4
0
.
0

8
6
.
2
-

7
0
.
0

5
0
.
0

8
8
.
1
-

9
0
.
0

7
0
.
0

0
3
.
1
-

1
1
.
0

0
1
.
0

8
4
.
1
-

1
1
.
0

3
1
.
0

-

L
B
T
R
W
V

3
1
.
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

7
1
.
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
2
.
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

7
1
.
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

4
1
.
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

2
1
.
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

1
1
.
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

8
0
.
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

3
0
.
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

1
9
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

D
D

4
7
.
3
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

7
5
.
0
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

3
8
.
0
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
3
.
9

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

9
0
.
9

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

4
5
.
7

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

5
8
.
6

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

5
9
.
6

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

8
0
.
6

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

6
3
.
6

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

D
R

4
1
.
2
-

i

ﬀ
D

0
8
.
5
1
-

1
2
.
0

3
2
.
0

4
3
.
0

4
4
.
0

2
4
.
0

3
1
.
2

9
0
.
0

1
1
.
0

5
2
.
3

2
0
.
0

3
0
.
0

8
2
.
3

1
0
.
0

1
0
.
0

3
1
.
4

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

8
1
.
4

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

7
0
.
5

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

8
7
.
4

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

7
8
.
4

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

1
8
.
0
1
-

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

4
8
.
9
-

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

1
0
.
8
-

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

3
8
.
7
-

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

7
4
.
4
-

1
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

1
2
.
4
-

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

8
9
.
2
-

0
0
.
0

1
0
.
0

7
0
.
2
-

2
0
.
0

1
0
.
0

7
3
.
0

7
3
.
0

5
3
.
0

-

L
B
T
R
W
V

5
1
.
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

8
1
.
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

9
1
.
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

6
1
.
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

3
1
.
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

2
1
.
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

1
1
.
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

8
0
.
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

2
0
.
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

2
9
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

D
D

0
6
.
6
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

D
R

0
8
.
0

5
3
.
0

4
3
.
0

i

ﬀ
D

3
5
.
9
-

1
0
.
0

1
0
.
0

9
4
.
3
1

8
6
.
2

0
5
.
5
-

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

5
0
.
0

6
0
.
0

4
0
.
0

1
0
.
0

6
5
.
3
1

3
7
.
3

8
1
.
5
-

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

2
0
.
0

2
0
.
0

2
6
.
2
1

1
6
.
4

7
4
.
3
-

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

7
0
.
0

4
0
.
0

4
2
.
2
1

1
4
.
4

5
8
.
3
-

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

2
0
.
0

1
0
.
0

9
0
.
0
1

3
6
.
5

3
8
.
0
-

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

9
5
.
9

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

4
8
.
8

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
9
.
7

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

2
6
.
5

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

3
3
.
0

9
2
.
0

8
3
.
5

5
5
.
0
-

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

7
3
.
0

0
3
.
0

7
8
.
5

4
7
.
0
-

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

7
2
.
0

5
2
.
0

3
8
.
5

6
3
.
0
-

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

6
3
.
0

4
3
.
0

9
9
.
5

3
5
.
0
-

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

9
2
.
0

0
3
.
0

-

L
B
T
R
W
V

4
1
.
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

7
1
.
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

8
1
.
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

5
1
.
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

3
1
.
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

2
1
.
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

1
1
.
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

8
0
.
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

3
0
.
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

2
9
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

D
D

8
0
.
3
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

D
R

4
5
.
3

5
0
.
0

6
0
.
0

i

ﬀ
D

7
2
.
2
1
-

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

5
6
.
0
1

5
1
.
5

7
5
.
9
-

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

6
1
.
1
1

8
9
.
5

9
4
.
8
-

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

3
1
.
0
1

6
6
.
6

5
8
.
6
-

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

1
1
.
0
1

7
2
.
6

8
4
.
6
-

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

7
3
.
8

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

6
0
.
8

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

9
2
.
8

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

8
7
.
7

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

1
7
.
7

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

4
5
.
7

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

1
5
.
7

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

5
5
.
7

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

1
4
.
7

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

8
1
.
7

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

7
4
.
4
-

1
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

1
7
.
3
-

1
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
3
-

1
0
.
0

1
0
.
0

6
7
.
2
-

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

1
7
.
1
-

2
0
.
0

1
0
.
0

-

L
B
T
R
W
V

9
3
.
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

5
3
.
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

1
3
.
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

3
2
.
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

3
2
.
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
2
.
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

6
1
.
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
1
.
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

6
0
.
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

3
9
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

6
1
.
0

8
1
.
0

D
D

8
1
.
4
1

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

D
R

1
9
.
1

5
2
.
0

7
2
.
0

L
B
T
-
1
C
E
D

)
l
l
a
m

s
(

1
7
.
1
1

3
1
.
2

L
B
T
-
2
C
E
D

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

3
0
.
0

4
0
.
0

5
7
.
1
1

6
2
.
3

L
B
T
-
3
C
E
D

8
9
.
0
1

2
1
.
4

L
B
T
-
4
C
E
D

7
5
.
0
1

9
0
.
4

L
B
T
-
5
C
E
D

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

4
8
.
9

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

8
6
.
8

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

1
5
.
8

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

5
2
.
8

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
2
.
7

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

7
3
.
5

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

7
9
.
4

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

1
5
.
5

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

9
4
.
5

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

L
B
T
-
6
C
E
D

L
B
T
-
7
C
E
D

L
B
T
-
8
C
E
D

L
B
T
-
9
C
E
D

0
0
.
0

0
0
.
0

)
g
i
b
(

9
4
.
5

L
B
T
-
0
1
C
E
D

.
e
g
a
p

t
x
e
n

e
e
S

:
s
e
t
o
N

Notes: Table 10 reports the results from the regression: DEC(j)t −T BLt = α1RD+α2DD+β (V W Rt − T BLt)+εt,
estimated for four periods and j=1,...,10. The numbers below the coeﬃcients in the RD and DD columms represent
p-values of a t-test under the null hypothesis that the estimates are not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero. The ﬁrst
number is the p-value of the test conducted using Newey-West (1987) heteroskedasticity and serial-correlation robust
t-statistics. The second number is the p-value of the test conducted using a conditional bootstrap t-statistic. The
p-values below the coeﬃcients in the “Diﬀ” column are obtained from the Newey-West and conditional bootstrap t-
statistics under the null that there is no diﬀerence in returns during Republican and Democratic regimes, or α1 = α2.

Table 11: Average Returns of Industry Portfolios under Republican and Democratic Presidents

Industry

RD

DD

Diﬀ

Industry

RD

DD

Diﬀ

Industry

RD

DD

Diﬀ

A: Signiﬁcance Tests for 1927. 9–1998.12

Agric

Food

Soda

Beer

Smoke

Toys

Fun

Books

Hshld

Clths

Hlth

MedEq

Drugs

Chems

Rubbr

Txtls

0.82
0.43
0.44
11.95
0.00
0.00
—

7.06
0.05
0.06
15.29
0.00
0.00
3.36
0.29
0.27
5.88
0.18
0.15
6.25
0.12
0.09
6.75
0.05
0.02
3.07
0.27
0.25
—

9.60
0.01
0.00
11.93
0.00
0.00
7.50
0.04
0.04
—

15.80
0.00
0.00
9.38
0.00
0.00
—

14.81
0.00
0.00
9.16
0.00
0.00
13.60
0.01
0.01
13.76
0.00
0.00
11.99
0.01
0.01
12.71
0.00
0.00
13.23
0.00
0.00
—

13.37
0.00
0.00
12.48
0.00
0.00
12.49
0.00
0.00
—

-14.98
0.01
0.01
2.57
0.27
0.26
—

-7.75
0.11
0.09
6.13
0.08
0.10
-10.24
0.12
0.11
-7.88
0.17
0.16
-5.74
0.21
0.19
-5.96
0.12
0.11
-10.15
0.05
0.04
—

-3.77
0.24
0.27
-0.55
0.45
0.44
-4.99
0.18
0.16
—

1.77
0.36
0.33

12.82
0.00
0.00

-11.05
0.06
0.03

T/Changes

¯R2

Notes: See next page.

BldMt

Cnstr

Steel

FabPr

Mach

ElcEq

Autos

Aero

Ships

Guns

5.07
0.13
0.10
-2.38
0.33
0.33
3.25
0.26
0.24
—

3.13
0.26
0.21
5.73
0.14
0.11
5.10
0.16
0.12
7.56
0.15
0.11
3.22
0.26
0.24
—

13.09
0.00
0.00
15.15
0.00
0.00
11.37
0.00
0.00
—

14.16
0.00
0.00
12.66
0.00
0.00
15.46
0.00
0.00
16.39
0.00
0.00
13.28
0.00
0.00
—

-8.02
0.09
0.07
-17.52
0.01
0.00
-8.12
0.11
0.13
—

-11.04
0.04
0.06
-6.93
0.14
0.14
-10.36
0.06
0.06
-8.83
0.15
0.13
-10.05
0.06
0.05
—

PerSv

BusSv

Comps

Chips

LabEq

Paper

Boxes

Trans

Whlsl

Rtail

Gold

—

—

—

Meals

Banks

Insur

RlEst

Fin

Other

Mines

Coal

Oil

Util

Telcm

1.99
0.33
0.30
2.34
0.31
0.32
5.62
0.07
0.07
9.34
0.01
0.01
10.96
0.00
0.00

-11.86
0.02
0.02
-11.90
0.03
0.03
-9.71
0.03
0.02
1.27
0.40
0.40
0.81
0.42
0.43

13.85
0.00
0.00
14.24
0.00
0.00
15.33
0.00
0.00
8.07
0.01
0.01
10.15
0.00
0.00

856/ 7

0.01

-1.21
0.43
0.43
2.89
0.28
0.29
8.67
0.04
0.02
1.95
0.37
0.34
5.64
0.14
0.10
—

9.91
0.00
0.01
2.38
0.32
0.32
-1.22
0.42
0.41
8.13
0.03
0.01
6.67
0.10
0.05
8.25
0.04
0.05
3.67
0.23
0.22
-4.04
0.26
0.23
3.75
0.23
0.21
1.63
0.36
0.30

14.70
0.00
0.00
16.50
0.00
0.00
15.67
0.00
0.00
18.59
0.00
0.00
15.58
0.00
0.00
—

10.86
0.00
0.00
12.49
0.00
0.00
15.26
0.00
0.00
12.54
0.00
0.00
12.89
0.00
0.00
16.26
0.00
0.00
14.46
0.00
0.00
14.05
0.01
0.00
15.60
0.00
0.00
13.95
0.00
0.00

-15.90
0.03
0.01
-13.61
0.02
0.03
-7.00
0.12
0.12
-16.63
0.01
0.01
-9.95
0.05
0.06
—

-0.95
0.42
0.41
-10.11
0.06
0.05
-16.48
0.01
0.00
-4.41
0.21
0.21
-6.22
0.17
0.14
-8.01
0.09
0.08
-10.79
0.03
0.04
-18.09
0.02
0.01
-11.84
0.03
0.02
-12.32
0.02
0.02

Table 11: Average Returns of Industry Portfolios under Republican and Democratic
Presidents (Cont’d)

Industry

RD

DD

Diﬀ

Industry

RD

DD

Diﬀ

Industry

RD

DD

Diﬀ

B: Signiﬁcance Tests for 1963. 9–1998.12

Agric

Food

Soda

Beer

Smoke

Toys

Fun

Books

Hshld

Clths

Hlth

MedEq

Drugs

Chems

Rubbr

Txtls

6.39
0.08
0.10
14.99
0.00
0.00
17.06
0.00
0.00
11.18
0.01
0.00
18.88
0.00
0.00
4.64
0.23
0.26
10.30
0.07
0.03
7.44
0.10
0.03
10.00
0.01
0.00
6.23
0.17
0.11
1.70
0.43
0.38
11.89
0.01
0.01
12.85
0.00
0.00
11.08
0.00
0.00
7.90
0.07
0.05
10.50
0.04
0.01

20.71
0.00
0.00
8.83
0.00
0.02
13.68
0.00
0.01
13.78
0.00
0.00
12.86
0.00
0.01
22.02
0.00
0.00
20.13
0.00
0.00
20.34
0.00
0.00
15.37
0.00
0.00
13.06
0.01
0.02
17.08
0.05
0.04
17.84
0.00
0.00
15.75
0.00
0.00
8.84
0.01
0.04
16.80
0.00
0.00
9.32
0.04
0.05

-14.31
0.02
0.04
6.16
0.10
0.10
3.39
0.30
0.28
-2.60
0.33
0.30
6.02
0.17
0.16
-17.38
0.03
0.02
-9.84
0.14
0.15
-12.90
0.03
0.03
-5.37
0.17
0.19
-6.83
0.21
0.18
-15.38
0.14
0.14
-5.96
0.18
0.21
-2.90
0.31
0.30
2.24
0.35
0.32
-8.90
0.12
0.11
1.18
0.44
0.41

T/Changes

¯R2

Notes: See next page.

BldMt

Cnstr

Steel

FabPr

Mach

ElcEq

Autos

Aero

Ships

Guns

Gold

Mines

Coal

Oil

Util

Telcm

8.15
0.04
0.03
-1.02
0.44
0.41
5.17
0.12
0.15
2.26
0.35
0.30
6.11
0.10
0.06
7.17
0.07
0.04
9.54
0.03
0.01
6.22
0.15
0.13
7.43
0.11
0.07
8.66
0.05
0.05
1.01
0.44
0.45
6.36
0.12
0.11
5.54
0.19
0.15
8.46
0.02
0.01
10.45
0.00
0.00
12.82
0.00
0.00

-7.39
0.12
0.17
-22.85
0.01
0.00
-3.99
0.26
0.29
-13.89
0.04
0.03
-7.70
0.13
0.14
-8.54
0.10
0.12
-1.40
0.42
0.43
-14.89
0.04
0.04
-10.55
0.08
0.08
-8.63
0.11
0.14
-13.60
0.10
0.10
-7.37
0.17
0.19
-8.45
0.16
0.19
-7.15
0.10
0.13
2.41
0.28
0.27
0.90
0.43
0.40

15.54
0.00
0.01
21.83
0.00
0.00
9.17
0.01
0.06
16.15
0.00
0.01
13.81
0.00
0.01
15.71
0.00
0.00
10.94
0.00
0.02
21.11
0.00
0.00
17.98
0.00
0.00
17.28
0.00
0.00
14.61
0.04
0.04
13.72
0.01
0.02
13.99
0.01
0.01
15.61
0.00
0.00
8.03
0.00
0.01
11.92
0.00
0.00

424/ 5

0.00

PerSv

BusSv

Comps

Chips

LabEq

Paper

Boxes

Trans

Whlsl

Rtail

Meals

Banks

Insur

RlEst

Fin

Other

-0.66
0.46
0.43
6.04
0.14
0.11
3.83
0.22
0.17
4.27
0.22
0.17
3.63
0.28
0.28
11.57
0.00
0.00
10.34
0.00
0.00
7.47
0.08
0.06
6.56
0.12
0.10
13.72
0.00
0.00
8.39
0.10
0.05
7.00
0.09
0.06
8.26
0.04
0.02
-1.63
0.40
0.36
8.05
0.03
0.03
5.07
0.17
0.16

19.70
0.00
0.00
24.78
0.00
0.00
20.51
0.00
0.00
21.62
0.00
0.00
23.51
0.00
0.00
9.75
0.01
0.04
8.81
0.01
0.03
13.00
0.00
0.02
20.81
0.00
0.00
11.30
0.00
0.01
19.61
0.00
0.00
17.52
0.00
0.00
17.14
0.00
0.00
25.27
0.00
0.00
19.92
0.00
0.00
14.34
0.00
0.01

-20.37
0.01
0.01
-18.74
0.00
0.01
-16.68
0.01
0.00
-17.35
0.01
0.01
-19.88
0.01
0.01
1.82
0.38
0.41
1.54
0.38
0.36
-5.53
0.22
0.22
-14.25
0.02
0.02
2.42
0.36
0.37
-11.23
0.10
0.10
-10.52
0.06
0.05
-8.88
0.09
0.09
-26.89
0.00
0.00
-11.87
0.02
0.02
-9.27
0.10
0.11

Notes: Table 11 reports mean excess returns of 48 industry portfolios. For exact deﬁnitions of the industries by
SIC codes, refer to Fama and French (1997). Panels A and B present the results for the entire sample and for the
period 1963:09-1998:12, respectively. Returns of industries for which historical data was not available are marked
by a dashed line. All rates are represented as annualized percentage points. The diﬀerence between Republican and
Democratic terms, displayed in column “Diﬀ”, is equivalent to running excess returns on a constant and a Republican
dummy variable, which corresponds to equation (1) in the text. Panel A presents the results from the statistical
inference. The numbers below the coeﬃcients in the RD and DD columms represent p-values of a t-test under the
null hypothesis that the estimates are not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero. The ﬁrst number is the p-value of the test
conducted using Newey-West (1988) heteroskedasticity and serial-correlation robust t-statistics. The second number
is the p-value of the test conducted using a conditional bootstrap t-statistic. The p-values below the coeﬃcients in
the “Diﬀ” column are obtained from the Newey-West and conditional bootstrap t-statistics under the null that there
is no diﬀerence in returns during Republican and Democratic regimes. The rows “T/Changes” display the number of
observations and the number of party changes during the estimation period. The rows “ ¯R2” display the average R2
obtained in the regressions. The presidential index variables do have an impact on the cross section of returns. In the
1927-1998 sample, 25 out of the 41 industry returns are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent during the two regimes at the 10 percent
level. During 1963-1998, 20 out of 48 industry returns are signiﬁcant at that level of signiﬁcance. (Note that if the
correlation were spurious, we would expect no more than 5 signiﬁcant results out of 48.) The overwhelming majority
of the industries have higher returns during Democratic presidents. For industries, whose returns are higher under
Republicans, the diﬀerence is not statistically signiﬁcant. The industries whose returns are higher under Republicans
tend to be big (Smoke, Util, Telcm) and dominated by a few large companies. Those ﬁndings are in accord with our
previous results that the diﬀerence in returns are more pronounced for the equally weighted returns and for returns
of small-sized companies.

Table 12: Average Returns under Republican and Democratic Presidents, Controlling for
Market Returns

Industry

RD

DD

Diﬀ

Industry

RD

DD

Diﬀ

Industry

RD

DD

Diﬀ

A: Signiﬁcance Tests for 1927. 1–1998.12

PerSv

—

—

—

Agric

Food

Soda

Beer

Smoke

Toys

Fun

Books

Hshld

Clths

Hlth

MedEq

Drugs

Chems

Rubbr

Txtls

4.64
0.05
0.08
15.00
0.00
0.00
—

11.01
0.00
0.00
18.11
0.00
0.00
7.21
0.02
0.05
10.58
0.00
0.00
9.80
0.00
0.00
10.25
0.00
0.00
7.13
0.00
0.00
—

13.16
0.00
0.00
15.31
0.00
0.00
12.07
0.00
0.00
—

12.94
0.00
0.00
7.00
0.00
0.00
—

11.76
0.00
0.00
7.17
0.00
0.00
9.75
0.01
0.01
9.47
0.00
0.00
8.69
0.00
0.00
10.01
0.00
0.00
10.14
0.00
0.00
—

10.70
0.00
0.00
9.79
0.00
0.00
9.35
0.00
0.00
—

-8.30
0.03
0.04
8.00
0.00
0.00
—

-0.75
0.43
0.43
10.94
0.00
0.00
-2.54
0.33
0.31
1.11
0.41
0.42
1.11
0.39
0.41
0.25
0.46
0.44
-3.01
0.19
0.18
—

2.46
0.25
0.26
5.53
0.04
0.02
2.72
0.11
0.11
—

6.43
0.01
0.00

9.30
0.00
0.00

-2.87
0.22
0.19

T/Changes

¯R2

Notes: See next page.

BldMt

Cnstr

Steel

FabPr

Mach

ElcEq

Autos

Aero

Ships

Guns

9.44
0.00
0.00
1.62
0.30
0.31
8.02
0.00
0.00
—

7.94
0.00
0.00
11.28
0.00
0.00
10.18
0.00
0.00
13.14
0.00
0.00
7.57
0.01
0.00
—

9.55
0.00
0.00
10.99
0.00
0.00
7.58
0.00
0.00
—

10.47
0.00
0.00
8.77
0.00
0.00
11.82
0.00
0.00
12.35
0.00
0.00
9.79
0.00
0.00
—

-0.11
0.48
0.46
-9.38
0.02
0.03
0.44
0.44
0.47
—

-2.54
0.14
0.10
2.51
0.18
0.16
-1.64
0.31
0.28
0.79
0.44
0.43
-2.22
0.29
0.25
—

BusSv

Comps

Chips

LabEq

Paper

Boxes

Trans

Whlsl

Rtail

Gold

—

—

—

Meals

Banks

Insur

RlEst

Fin

Other

Mines

Coal

Oil

Util

Telcm

5.70
0.02
0.01
5.36
0.09
0.06
8.35
0.00
0.00
12.71
0.00
0.00
13.28
0.00
0.00

-5.33
0.07
0.07
-6.63
0.10
0.10
-4.29
0.08
0.06
7.23
0.01
0.00
5.03
0.02
0.02

11.03
0.00
0.00
11.99
0.00
0.00
12.63
0.00
0.00
5.48
0.01
0.00
8.25
0.00
0.00

863/ 7

0.55

6.83
0.01
0.04
12.96
0.00
0.00
6.45
0.00
0.02
9.78
0.00
0.00
—

13.68
0.00
0.00
6.75
0.00
0.00
1.72
0.28
0.24
12.28
0.00
0.00
10.66
0.00
0.00
11.95
0.00
0.00
8.49
0.00
0.00
0.90
0.38
0.42
8.85
0.00
0.00
5.67
0.02
0.00

13.66
0.00
0.00
12.60
0.00
0.00
14.62
0.00
0.00
12.60
0.00
0.00
—

8.03
0.00
0.00
8.99
0.00
0.00
11.86
0.00
0.00
9.58
0.00
0.00
9.80
0.00
0.00
13.11
0.00
0.00
11.00
0.00
0.00
10.10
0.00
0.00
11.78
0.00
0.00
10.79
0.00
0.00

-6.83
0.04
0.11
0.36
0.46
0.45
-8.17
0.01
0.01
-2.83
0.24
0.24
—

5.65
0.01
0.01
-2.25
0.21
0.23
-10.14
0.00
0.00
2.70
0.16
0.12
0.86
0.41
0.40
-1.16
0.37
0.36
-2.50
0.22
0.26
-9.20
0.03
0.05
-2.93
0.11
0.12
-5.12
0.08
0.08

Table 12: Average Returns under Republican and Democratic Presidents, Controlling for
Market Returns (Cont’d)

Industry

RD

DD

Diﬀ

Industry

RD

DD

Diﬀ

Industry

RD

DD

Diﬀ

B: Signiﬁcance Tests for 1963.10–1998.12

Agric

Food

Soda

Beer

Smoke

Toys

Fun

Books

Hshld

Clths

Hlth

MedEq

Drugs

Chems

Rubbr

Txtls

8.88
0.00
0.01
17.03
0.00
0.00
19.28
0.00
0.00
13.26
0.00
0.00
21.00
0.00
0.00
8.03
0.01
0.02
13.53
0.00
0.00
9.88
0.00
0.00
12.37
0.00
0.00
9.20
0.00
0.00
4.92
0.23
0.22
14.39
0.00
0.00
15.24
0.00
0.00
13.55
0.00
0.00
10.75
0.00
0.00
13.02
0.00
0.00

17.19
0.00
0.00
6.00
0.00
0.02
10.55
0.00
0.00
10.66
0.00
0.00
10.11
0.01
0.01
17.37
0.00
0.00
15.54
0.00
0.00
16.53
0.00
0.00
12.00
0.00
0.00
8.97
0.01
0.01
11.95
0.09
0.05
14.44
0.00
0.00
12.59
0.00
0.00
5.29
0.01
0.01
12.85
0.00
0.00
5.68
0.07
0.07

-8.31
0.06
0.10
11.03
0.00
0.00
8.73
0.03
0.02
2.60
0.26
0.28
10.89
0.02
0.01
-9.34
0.09
0.06
-2.01
0.37
0.34
-6.65
0.04
0.04
0.37
0.45
0.44
0.23
0.48
0.43
-7.04
0.26
0.26
-0.05
0.50
0.49
2.64
0.25
0.27
8.26
0.00
0.00
-2.10
0.32
0.30
7.34
0.08
0.05

T/Changes

¯R2

Notes: See next page.

BldMt

Cnstr

Steel

FabPr

Mach

ElcEq

Autos

Aero

Ships

Guns

Gold

Mines

Coal

Oil

Util

Telcm

10.93
0.00
0.00
2.33
0.22
0.22
7.67
0.01
0.00
4.97
0.09
0.08
8.95
0.00
0.00
10.00
0.00
0.00
11.86
0.00
0.00
9.33
0.00
0.00
10.06
0.01
0.00
11.56
0.00
0.00
2.97
0.33
0.30
8.89
0.02
0.00
8.28
0.07
0.03
10.57
0.00
0.00
11.94
0.00
0.00
14.38
0.00
0.00

-0.57
0.42
0.41
-14.81
0.00
0.00
2.20
0.30
0.27
-7.30
0.10
0.10
-0.84
0.41
0.41
-1.66
0.33
0.37
4.36
0.15
0.11
-7.58
0.10
0.07
-4.23
0.23
0.21
-1.88
0.34
0.37
-8.91
0.19
0.19
-1.12
0.42
0.46
-2.03
0.39
0.41
-2.20
0.30
0.31
5.89
0.03
0.05
4.86
0.11
0.10

11.51
0.00
0.00
17.14
0.00
0.00
5.47
0.02
0.06
12.27
0.00
0.00
9.79
0.00
0.00
11.66
0.00
0.00
7.50
0.00
0.01
16.91
0.00
0.00
14.29
0.00
0.00
13.45
0.00
0.00
11.89
0.07
0.07
10.01
0.01
0.02
10.30
0.01
0.02
12.77
0.00
0.00
6.05
0.00
0.01
9.52
0.00
0.00

423/ 5

0.62

PerSv

BusSv

Comps

Chips

LabEq

Paper

Boxes

Trans

Whlsl

Rtail

Meals

Banks

Insur

RlEst

Fin

Other

2.19
0.32
0.27
9.15
0.00
0.00
6.09
0.02
0.02
7.44
0.00
0.00
6.80
0.03
0.04
13.86
0.00
0.00
12.61
0.00
0.00
10.40
0.00
0.00
9.48
0.00
0.00
16.22
0.00
0.00
11.54
0.00
0.00
9.74
0.00
0.00
10.57
0.00
0.00
1.41
0.34
0.32
10.71
0.00
0.00
7.81
0.00
0.00

15.46
0.00
0.00
20.29
0.00
0.00
17.04
0.00
0.00
17.19
0.00
0.00
18.83
0.00
0.00
6.10
0.01
0.02
5.64
0.03
0.01
8.96
0.00
0.00
16.62
0.00
0.00
7.58
0.00
0.01
15.16
0.00
0.00
13.72
0.00
0.00
13.85
0.00
0.00
21.03
0.00
0.00
16.24
0.00
0.00
10.21
0.00
0.00

-13.26
0.02
0.01
-11.14
0.00
0.00
-10.95
0.01
0.01
-9.75
0.01
0.00
-12.03
0.01
0.01
7.76
0.02
0.01
6.97
0.02
0.03
1.43
0.35
0.39
-7.14
0.03
0.02
8.63
0.01
0.01
-3.62
0.25
0.23
-3.98
0.17
0.15
-3.29
0.23
0.19
-19.62
0.00
0.00
-5.53
0.01
0.00
-2.40
0.29
0.29

Notes: Table 12 reports mean excess returns of 48 industry portfolios, after controlling for market returns. For exact
deﬁnitions of the industries by SIC codes, refer to Fama and French (1997). Panels A and B present the results for
the entire sample and for the period 1963:09-1998:12, respectively. Returns of industries for which historical data was
not available are marked by a dashed line. All rates are represented as annualized percentage points. The diﬀerence
between Republican and Democratic terms, displayed in column “Diﬀ”, is equivalent to running excess returns on a
constant a Republican dummy variable, and VWR-TBL. Panel A presents the results from the statistical inference.
For conciseness, we do not display the coeﬃcient on VWR-TBL (the beta of the industry). The numbers below the
coeﬃcients in the RD and DD columms represent p-values of a t-test under the null hypothesis that the estimates are
not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero. The ﬁrst number is the p-value of the test conducted using Newey-West (1988)
heteroskedasticity and serial-correlation robust t-statistics. The second number is the p-value of the test conducted
using a conditional bootstrap t-statistic. The p-values below the coeﬃcients in the “Diﬀ” column are obtained from
the Newey-West and conditional bootstrap t-statistics under the null that there is no diﬀerence in returns during
Republican and Democratic regimes. The rows “T/Changes” display the number of observations and the number of
party changes during the estimation period. The rows “ ¯R2” display the average R2 obtained in the regressions. Even
after controlling for the market return, the presidential index variables do have an impact on the cross section of
returns. Interestingly, the results in Tables 9 and 10 are not very diﬀerent, which implies that the political variables
capture variations that are unrelated to the market. In the 1927-1998 sample, 17 out of the 41 industry returns are
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent during the two regimes at the 10 percent level. During 1963-1998, 23 out of 48 industry returns
are signiﬁcant at that level of signiﬁcance. (Note that if the correlation were spurious, we would expect no more than
5 signiﬁcant results out of 48.) The overwhelming majority of the industries have higher returns under Democratic
presidents. For industries, whose returns are higher under Republicans, the diﬀerence is not statistically signiﬁcant.
The indusries whose returns are higher under Republicans tend to be big (Smoke, Util, Telcm) and dominated by a
few large companies. Those ﬁndings are in accord with our previous results that the diﬀerence in returns are more
pronounced for the equally weighted returns and for returns of small-sized companies.

Table I: Impact of Congress on Excess Returns

RSD

RHD

RD

DD

Diﬀ1

Diﬀ2

1927:1–1998:12

-9.24
0.19
-3.32
0.37
-6.44
0.31
-0.53
0.48
5.90
0.00

13.60
0.12
9.61
0.20
0.51
0.49
-3.44
0.40
-3.96
0.00

3.13
0.20
3.97
0.14
2.53
0.31
3.38
0.25
0.81
0.01

9.99
0.00
8.55
0.00
17.47
0.00
16.02
0.00
-1.47
0.00

-22.84
0.14
-12.94
0.27
-6.95
0.40
2.91
0.46
9.85
0.00

-6.86
0.07
-4.58
0.16
-14.95
0.01
-12.64
0.03
2.28
0.00

863/ 7

0.02

2.93
0.35
8.50
0.14
2.61
0.40
8.18
0.22
5.63
0.00

3.04
0.35
8.13
0.15
4.16
0.35
9.25
0.19
5.15
0.00

1946:1–1998:12

6.32
0.21
0.70
0.47
-2.06
0.42
-7.66
0.24
-5.66
0.00

2.30
0.26
1.74
0.33
1.46
0.39
0.91
0.43
-0.61
0.16

8.85
0.00
9.47
0.00
14.97
0.00
15.57
0.00
0.64
0.08

-3.39
0.41
7.80
0.31
4.67
0.41
15.83
0.22
11.29
0.00

-6.55
0.06
-7.73
0.04
-13.50
0.01
-14.66
0.01
-1.25
0.05

635/ 7

0.01

1946:1–1993:12

6.86
0.21
-1.21
0.45
6.00
0.29
-2.09
0.43
-8.16
0.00

2.20
0.29
2.11
0.30
-0.09
0.49
-0.16
0.49
-0.13
0.42

9.47
0.00
9.53
0.00
17.71
0.00
17.73
0.00
0.06
0.45

-3.83
0.40
9.34
0.27
-1.84
0.46
11.34
0.29
13.31
0.00

-7.28
0.07
-7.41
0.07
-17.80
0.00
-17.89
0.00
-0.18
0.41

575/ 7

0.02

1960:1–1998:12

5.31
0.26
9.76
0.12
7.48
0.25
11.91
0.15
4.49
0.00

4.71
0.32
2.82
0.39
-17.50
0.12
-19.30
0.09
-1.87
0.00

-0.08
0.49
0.48
0.46
-3.41
0.31
-2.82
0.34
0.53
0.05

7.56
0.01
7.93
0.01
17.80
0.00
18.14
0.00
0.39
0.12

0.60
0.49
6.94
0.35
24.98
0.15
31.21
0.10
6.36
0.00

-7.64
0.09
-7.45
0.10
-21.21
0.00
-20.96
0.01
0.15
0.38

467/ 5

0.03

VWR-TBL

VWR-INF

EWR-TBL

EWR-INF

TBL-INF

T/Changes

R2

VWR-TBL

VWR-INF

EWR-TBL

EWR-INF

TBL-INF

T/Changes

R2

VWR-TBL

VWR-INF

EWR-TBL

EWR-INF

TBL-INF

T/Changes

R2

VWR-TBL

VWR-INF

EWR-TBL

EWR-INF

TBL-INF

T/Changes

R2

Notes: See Next Page.

Notes: The table displays the coeﬃcients from the regression: rt+1 = α1 RSD + α2RHD + α3RD +
α4DD + εt+1, where the variables RSD, RHD, RD, and, DD are deﬁned in section 2 of the text. The
coeﬃcient α1 can be interpreted as the diﬀerence in returns during a Republican-majority Senate and a
Democratic-majority Senate. Similarly, the coeﬃcient α2 can be interpreted as the diﬀerence in returns
during a Republican-majority House and a Democratic-majority House. The null hypothesis α1 = α2 is
tested in column “Diﬀ1”. The null hypothesis α3 = α4, tested in column “Diﬀ2”, is the diﬀerence in returns
between Republican and Democratic presidencies, when controlling for Congress. P-values from Newey-
West (1987) T-statistics are shown below the estimated coeﬃcients. Similar results were obtained with the
business cycle control variables

Table II: Excess Returns, controlling for Presidency and Senate

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

DSDxDD RSDxDD DSDxRD RSDxRD Diﬀ(4-3) Diﬀ(2-1) Diﬀ(4-2) Diﬀ(3-1)

21.88
0.00
18.70
0.02
-1.12
0.16
19.39
0.00
16.19
0.03

41.67
0.00
33.47
0.00
1.21
0.07
36.70
0.00
28.48
0.00

10.86
0.00
18.73
0.00
-0.75
0.08
8.37
0.01
16.27
0.00

13.59
0.00
23.51
0.00
0.97
0.01
8.73
0.00
18.69
0.00

VWR-TBL

VWR-INF

EWR-TBL

EWR-INF

TBL-INF

T/Changes

R2

VWR-TBL

VWR-INF

EWR-TBL

EWR-INF

TBL-INF

T/Changes

R2

1927:1–1998:12

10.78
0.00
10.84
0.01
0.20
0.30
6.28
0.05
6.32
0.10

2.48
0.33
-2.49
0.36
4.99
0.00
-3.47
0.27
-8.45
0.12

-8.307
0.02
-13.330
0.04
4.790
0.00
-9.744
0.01
-14.771
0.02

863/ 7

0.06

1946:1–1998:12

8.06
0.01
5.41
0.10
-0.52
0.22
3.71
0.14
1.05
0.41

2.37
0.29
-2.90
0.31
1.71
0.05
-2.70
0.27
-7.99
0.09

-5.689
0.00
-8.308
0.00
2.229
0.00
-6.411
0.00
-9.042
0.00

635/ 7

0.08

11.022
0.19
-0.033
0.07
-0.361
0.00
11.012
0.20
-0.082
0.07

28.077
0.01
9.959
0.00
0.234
0.00
27.965
0.11
9.787
0.01

-19.401
0.00
-21.189
0.00
6.104
0.09
-22.855
0.00
-24.642
0.00

-0.072
0.00
-7.892
0.00
0.953
0.00
-2.099
0.00
-9.953
0.00

-39.298
0.01
-36.367
0.03
0.507
0.13
-39.393
0.02
-36.469
0.05

-5.532
0.00
-18.100
0.00
-1.489
0.11
-5.017
0.00
-17.640
0.00

Notes: The tables display the results from the regressions: rt+1 = α1DSDtDDt+α2RSDtDDt+α3DSDtRDt+
α4RSDtRDt + β(cid:1)Xt + εt+1, where Xt is a vector of the usual control variables. The OLS estimates of the
α coeﬃcients and p-values from Newey-West t-statistics are displayed in columns 1 through 4, respectively.
The goal of this regression is to test whether the diﬀerence in returns can be traced to a particular Senate-
White House combination. The possible null hypotheses, α3 = α4, α1 = α2, α2 = α4, and α1 = α3 are
tested in columns 5 through 8. We were unable to run the 1946-1993 and 1960-1998 periods because the
explanatory variables were almost perfectly multicollinear. The rows “T/Changes” display the number of
observations and the number of party changes during the estimation period. The rows “ ¯R2” display the
average R2 obtained in the regressions.

Table III: Excess Returns, controlling for Presidency and House of Representatives

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

DHDxDD RHDxDD DHDxRD RHDxRD Diﬀ(4-3) Diﬀ(2-1) Diﬀ(4-2) Diﬀ(3-1)

20.48
0.00
16.54
0.03
-0.42
0.36
17.67
0.00
13.70
0.05

38.99
0.00
28.09
0.00
2.41
0.00
33.47
0.00
22.53
0.01

10.89
0.00
18.81
0.00
-0.82
0.07
8.38
0.01
16.32
0.00

13.78
0.00
24.34
0.00
0.84
0.04
9.03
0.00
19.62
0.00

VWR-TBL

VWR-INF

EWR-TBL

EWR-INF

TBL-INF

T/Changes

R2

VWR-TBL

VWR-INF

EWR-TBL

EWR-INF

TBL-INF

T/Changes

R2

1927:1–1998:12

7.05
0.01
5.25
0.10
1.76
0.00
1.47
0.32
-0.35
0.47

10.42
0.13
8.11
0.25
3.66
0.00
8.18
0.19
5.85
0.31

3.363
0.04
2.861
0.09
1.904
0.00
6.713
0.02
6.206
0.06

9.595
0.21
-2.276
0.08
0.392
0.00
9.288
0.22
-2.623
0.09

-10.066
0.00
-8.429
0.01
4.086
0.06
-9.483
0.00
-7.846
0.01

-3.834
0.00
-13.567
0.00
2.573
0.00
-6.908
0.00
-16.675
0.00

863/ 7

0.06

1946:1–1998:12

6.20
0.02
1.63
0.34
0.32
0.32
1.47
0.32
-3.13
0.22

8.17
0.12
11.78
0.08
-1.21
0.24
4.75
0.25
8.38
0.16

1.965
0.00
10.148
0.05
-1.533
0.03
3.280
0.00
11.508
0.04

25.207
0.02
3.751
0.00
1.570
0.00
24.436
0.15
2.903
0.01

-30.825
0.01
-16.305
0.02
-3.619
0.23
-28.720
0.01
-14.147
0.04

-7.583
0.00
-22.702
0.00
-0.517
0.23
-7.564
0.00
-22.751
0.00

635/ 7

0.08

Notes: The tables display the results from the regressions: rt+1 = α1DHDtDDt + α2RHDtDDt +
α3DHDtRDt + α4RHDtRDt + β(cid:1)Xt + εt+1, where Xt is a vector of the usual

Figures

Figure 1: Average Annual Excess Returns by Presidential Term, 1927-1998

40

30

20

10

0

−10

−20

−30

i

s
t
n
o
P
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P
d
e
z

i
l

a
u
n
n
A
n

i

t

s
n
r
u
e
R
W
V
s
s
e
c
x
E

1
4
9
1
−
7
3
9
1

:
)

D

(

t
l
e
v
e
s
o
o
R

3
3
9
1
−
9
2
9
1
:
)

R

(

r
e
v
o
o
H

7
3
9
1
−
3
3
9
1

:
)

D

(

t
l
e
v
e
s
o
o
R

5
4
9
1
−
1
4
9
1

:
)

D

(

n
a
m
u
r
T

/
t
l
e
v
e
s
o
o
R

9
4
9
1
−
5
4
9
1

:
)

D

(

n
a
m
u
r
T

3
5
9
1
−
9
4
9
1
:
)

D

(
n
a
m
u
r
T

7
5
9
1
−
3
5
9
1

:
)

R

(

r
e
w
o
h
n
e
s
E

i

1
6
9
1
−
7
5
9
1

:
)

R

(

r
e
w
o
h
n
e
s
E

i

5
6
9
1
−
1
6
9
1
:
)

D

(

n
o
s
n
h
o
J
/
y
d
e
n
n
e
K

9
6
9
1
−
5
6
9
1

:
)

D

(

n
o
s
n
h
o
J

3
7
9
1
−
9
6
9
1
:
)

R

(

n
o
x
N

i

7
7
9
1
−
3
7
9
1

:
)

R

(

d
r
o
F
/
n
o
x
N

i

1
8
9
1
−
7
7
9
1
:
)

D

(

r
e
t
r
a
C

5
8
9
1
−
1
8
9
1
:
)

R

(

n
a
g
a
e
R

9
8
9
1
−
5
8
9
1
:
)

R

(

n
a
g
a
e
R

3
9
9
1
−
9
8
9
1

:
)

R

(

h
s
u
B

7
9
9
1
−
3
9
9
1

:
)

D

(

n
o
t
n

i
l

C

8
9
9
1
−
7
9
9
1

:
)

D

(

n
o
t
n

i
l

C

−40

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1980

1990

years

Notes: Figure 1 displays the average annualized excess value weighted returns during each presidential term dur-
ing the 1927-1998 period. Republican administrations are denoted with darker shades. The average excess return
is marked in dash-dotted line. Most Democratic presidencies have been associated with higher than average ex-
cess returns (with Roosevelt’s (1937-1941) tenure being the only signiﬁcant exception). Similarly, most Republican
presidencies have been associated with signiﬁcantly lower than average returns (the only exception is Eisenhower
(1953-1957)).

Figure 2: Quantiles of Diﬀerence in Excess Returns under Republican and Democratic Presi-
dencies

Excess Value Weighted Returns, 1927−1998

Excess Equally Weighted Returns, 1927−1998

s
t
a
r
c
o
m
e
D
d
n
a

s
n
a
c

i
l

b
u
p
e
R
g
n
i
r
u
d

s
n
r
u
t
e
R
n

i

e
c
n
e
r
e
f
f
i

D
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P
d
e
z

i
l

a
u
n
n
A

60

40

20

0

95% CI

mean

−20

Quantile

−40

95% CI

−60

0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
τ−−Quantile of Difference in Returns

s
t
a
r
c
o
m
e
D
d
n
a

s
n
a
c

i
l

b
u
p
e
R
g
n
i
r
u
d

s
n
r
u
t
e
R
n

i

e
c
n
e
r
e
f
f
i

D
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P
d
e
z

i
l

a
u
n
n
A

60

40

20

0

−20

−40

−60

95% CI

mean

Quantile

95% CI

0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
τ−−Quantile of Difference in Returns

Notes: Figure 2 displays the diﬀerence in quantiles of value weighted and equally weighted returns between Re-
publican and Democratic presidents (see Figure 2). The quantile of the diﬀerence is computed as: h ˆα(τ ), ˆβ(τ )i =
t ρτ (rt − α − βRDt) as discussed in the text. The diﬀerence in quantiles ˆβ(τ ) is displayed in a solid
arg minα,β
line, for τ =0.02,...,0.98, whereas the dashed pattern denotes the 2.5%, mean, and 97.5% of the estimates, computed
by bootstrap. The mean of the diﬀerence is shown for reference as a light straight line. The statistical signiﬁcance of
the diﬀerence comes from the middle quantiles, which supports our robustness claims.

P

Figure 3: Quantiles of Diﬀerence in Excess Returns under Republican and Democratic Presi-
dencies, Controlling for Business Cycle Variables

Excess Value Weighted Returns, 1927−1998

Excess Equally Weighted Returns, 1927−1998

s
t
a
r
c
o
m
e
D
d
n
a

s
n
a
c

i
l

b
u
p
e
R
g
n
i
r
u
d

s
n
r
u
t
e
R
n

i

e
c
n
e
r
e
f
f
i

D
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P
d
e
z

i
l

a
u
n
n
A

60

40

20

0

95% CI

mean

Quantile

95% CI

−20

−40

−60

0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
τ−−Quantile of Difference in Returns

s
t
a
r
c
o
m
e
D
d
n
a

s
n
a
c

i
l

b
u
p
e
R
g
n
i
r
u
d

s
n
r
u
t
e
R
n

i

e
c
n
e
r
e
f
f
i

D
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P
d
e
z

i
l

a
u
n
n
A

60

40

20

0

−20

−40

−60

95% CI

mean

Quantile

95% CI

0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
τ−−Quantile of Difference in Returns

Notes: Figure 3 displays the results from the quantile regression:
t ρτ (yt − α − βRDt − γ(cid:1)Zt) , where ˆβ(τ ) captures the quantiles of the diﬀerence
h ˆα(τ ), ˆβ(τ ), ˆγ (τ )i = arg minα,β,γ
in returns between Republicans and Democrats, after controlling for business cycle variables. The results are not
very diﬀerent from the unconditional case (Figure 2): the diﬀerence in returns remains signiﬁcant in the middle of
the distribution (quantiles 30 to 70).

P

Figure 4: Stock Market Level Around the Four Most Contested Elections

A: Truman(D)/Dewey(R),1948.11

B: Carter(D)/Ford(R),1976.11

0.1

0.05

e
c
i
r
p

0

−0.05

−40

−30

−20
0
−10
days (election=0)

0.1

0.05

e
c
i
r
p

0

−0.05

10

20

−40

−30

−20
0
−10
days (election=0)

10

20

C: Eisenhower(R)/Stevenson(D),1952.11

D: Reagan(R)/Carter(D),1980.11

0.1

0.05

e
c
i
r
p

0

−0.05

−40

−30

−20
0
−10
days (election=0)

0.1

0.05

e
c
i
r
p

0

−0.05

10

20

−40

−30

−20
0
−10
days (election=0)

10

20

Notes: Figure 4 displays the price of the value-weighted portfolio during the 4 elections that were either incorrectly
forecasted by Gallup and political scientists, or were very close in their outcome. The elections in subplots A and B
were won by Democrats, whereas those in subplots C and D, by Republicans.

0.08

0.07

0.06

0.05

e
c
i
r
p

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

0

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

e
c
i
r
p

−0.05

−0.1

−100

Figure 5: Stock Market Level Around Election Dates

A: 1928−1996

B: 1928−1996

0.04

0.035

0.03

0.025

0.02

0.015

0.01

0.005

0

e
c
i
r
p

−80

−60

−40

−20

0

days (election=0)

−0.005

−20

−10

0

10

20

days (election=0)

C: 1928−1996

D: 1928−1996

All presidents
Elected Democrat
Elected Republican

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

e
c
i
r
p

0
days (election=0)

100

200

300

−0.1

0

200
days (election=0)

400

600

800

Notes: Figure 5 displays the price of the value-weighted portfolio during diﬀerent periods of the election cycle. The
daily data is from 1928 to 1996, encompassing 18 presidential elections, 10 Democratic, and 8 Republican. Subplots A
and B show the average movement of prices during the period of the election. Subplots C and D trace the movement of
prices one year and three and a half years after the election. The diﬀerence in returns (prices) during Republican and
Democratic president is neither due to the period before the election, nor to any given period during the presidential
cycle.

Figure 6: Excess Return-Variance Tradeoﬀ

VWR−TBL

←32

←96

←84

←52

←48

←92

←60
←40 ←44

←64
←56

←88

←76

←80
←68

←72

←36

30

20

10

0

−10

−20

n
r
u
t
e
r

s
s
e
c
x
e
e
g
a
r
e
v
a

Republican Presidency
Democratic Presidency

−30

5

10

15

20

25
variance

30

35

40

45

←28
