Introduction to U.S. Economy: The Business Cycle and Growth

Updated October 3, 2024

On July 19, 2021, the National Bureau of Economic
Research (NBER), an independent, nonprofit research
group, announced that economic activity in the United
States reached a post-COVID-19 pandemic onset trough in
April 2020 and subsequently exited a two-month recession.
NBER has not announced any peaks in economic activity in
the intervening years. This In Focus discusses the business
cycle, how recessions are determined, and potential causes
and effects of these fluctuations in the economy.

What Is the Business Cycle?
Over time, economic activity tends to fluctuate between
periods of increasing economic activity, known as
economic expansions, and periods of decreasing economic
activity, known as recessions. Real gross domestic product
(GDP)—total economic output adjusted for inflation—is
the broadest measure of economic activity. The economy’s
movement through these alternating periods of growth and
contraction is known as the business cycle. The business
cycle has four phases: expansion, peak, contraction, and
trough, as shown in Figure 1.

Figure 1. Stylized Depiction of the Business Cycle

Source: Congressional Research Service.

As the economy moves through the business cycle, a
number of additional economic indicators tend to shift
alongside GDP. During an economic expansion, economy-
wide employment, incomes, industrial production, and sales
all tend to increase alongside the rising real GDP.
Additionally, over the course of an economic expansion, the
rate of inflation tends to increase, although the 2009-2020
expansion showed that inflation can remain low while the
economy is growing. During a recession, the opposite tends
to occur. All of these indicators do not shift simultaneously,
but they tend to shift around the same time.

Although these fluctuations in economic activity are
referred to as a “cycle,” the economy generally does not
exhibit a regular and smooth cycle as shown in Figure 1.
Predicting recessions and expansions is notoriously difficult
due to the irregular pattern of the business cycle; a single
quarter of economic data can be too short to predict a trend,
although this was not the case with COVID-19. During an

expansion, there may also be short periods of decreasing
economic activity interspersed within an expansionary
period, and vice versa.

Dating the Business Cycles
Business cycles are dated according to the peaks and
troughs of economic activity. A single business cycle is
dated from peak to peak or trough to trough. NBER’s
Business Cycle Dating Committee is generally credited
with identifying business cycles in the United States.

NBER does not define recession as two consecutive
quarters of declining real GDP, which is a popular metric
used by the media. Rather NBER uses a broader definition
of recession as a period where there is a significant and
persistent decline in economic activity that is spread across
the economy. NBER uses a number of indicators to
measure economic activity, including real GDP, economy-
wide employment, real sales, and industrial production.

The COVID-19 recession technically lasted just two
months. The most recently completed recession in the
United States prior to the COVID-19 pandemic began in
December 2007 and ended in June 2009, a total of 18
months. Since the 1850s, in the United States, 12 other
recessions have lasted as long as or longer than the 2007-
2009 recession; however, all these recessions occurred
before the 1930s, when the Great Depression itself featured
recessions—one of which lasted 44 months.

Figure 2 presents real GDP from the first quarter of 1947
through the second quarter of 2024, along with recessions,
as identified by NBER, represented with gray bars. Over
this period, real GDP grew at a 3.1% average annual rate.

Figure 2. Real GDP and Recessions
1947:Q1-2024:Q2

Source: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis.
Note: Gray bars represent recessions as defined by NBER.

https://crsreports.congress.gov

The economy tends to experience longer periods of
expansion than contraction, especially since World War II.
Between 1945 and 2019, the end of the most recent
business cycle, the average expansion has lasted about 65
months, and the average recession has lasted about 11
months. Between the 1850s and World War II, the average
expansion lasted less than half as long (about 26 months),
and the average recession lasted about twice as long (about
21 months). The 2009-2020 expansion was the longest on
record at 128 months.

However, marking the end of a recession does not mean
that the economy has returned to its pre-recession level of
economic activity; it takes time for the economy to recover
from its low point. In addition, other economic conditions
can remain distressed. For example, following the Great
Recession, the economy did not return to what is considered
“full employment” until summer 2015, six years after the
end of the technical recession. On the other hand, the
economy returned to full employment about two years after
the COVID-19 recession, in line with the recovery of real
GDP.

Short-Term Economic Growth
In the short term, the business cycle is primarily driven by
fluctuations in consumer spending and business investment.
Over the business cycle, the rate at which the economy is
expanding or contracting can be significantly different. For
example, during the 2009-2020 expansion, real GDP grew
at an average pace of about 2.5% per year, whereas real
GDP shrank at an annual rate 28.1% in the second quarter
of 2020 before growing at an annual rate of 35.2% in the
third quarter. Over longer periods of time, the volatility of
the business cycle fades to reveal a pattern of growth in the
economy.

Potential Causes of the Business Cycle
In general, the business cycle is governed by aggregate
demand (total spending) within the economy, but recessions
can also be caused by sudden shocks to supply, which will
impact both aggregate supply and aggregate demand. The
COVID-19 recession was unusual in that it displays
elements of both demand and supply shocks. This section
discusses these types of shocks in more detail.

Demand Shocks
Changes in consumer or business confidence can impact
aggregate demand. If individuals believe the economy will
perform poorly in the future, they are likely to increase how
much they save to prepare for lean times ahead. The
associated decrease in spending would lower aggregate
demand. Similarly, if businesses perceive that the economy
is about to enter a recession, they are less likely to make
investments in new machinery or factories because
consumers would not be able to afford their new products
during the recession. The COVID-19 public health crisis
contributed to the March-April 2020 recession in this
manner. Uncertainty surrounding the virus and the state of
the economy combined with high unemployment levels
resulted in decreased consumption and increased saving (as
a percentage of income) on the part of consumers and
decreased desire to increase capital investment on the part
of firms.

Introduction to U.S. Economy: The Business Cycle and Growth

Supply Shocks
Events outside of the United States can often impact
aggregate demand inside the United States, such as the
1973 and 1979 oil shocks that led to increased prices across
the U.S. economy, resulting in two recessions. The U.S.
economy has seen several supply shocks in the past few
years. In some ways, the COVID-19 recession was a supply
shock: The need for social distancing halted commerce
significantly and created challenges in supply chains. The
Russian invasion of Ukraine also created significant supply
disruptions in several commodities markets in 2022,
although this did not result in recession in the United States.

Policy Options
Government policy, specifically monetary and fiscal policy,
can impact aggregate demand either directly or indirectly.
Congress, together with the President, is responsible for
fiscal policy in the United States through changes in the
level of government spending and tax revenue. Fiscal
policy can directly increase aggregate demand by
increasing government spending, reducing taxes, increasing
government transfers to individuals, or a combination of the
three. During a recession, the government typically finances
these policies by borrowing money, referred to as deficit
financing. The government has used fiscal stimulus tools
during the current crisis when, for example, it sent out
stimulus checks directly to consumers or when it
temporarily increased unemployment benefits.

Monetary policy can also be used to impact aggregate
demand. The Federal Reserve implements monetary policy
by changing short-term interest rates and the availability of
credit in the economy. For example, lowering interest rates,
which the Federal Reserve did in response to COVID-19,
can encourage businesses to make new investments and
individuals to buy new goods, as lower interest rates make
it less expensive to borrow money.

Fiscal and monetary policy, when implemented
successfully, can help reduce economic volatility. When
unsuccessful, these policies may exacerbate the fluctuations
of the business cycle. The fiscal and monetary policy
options discussed in this section are countercyclical
policies, meaning they work to counter the business cycle.
For example, countercyclical fiscal policy might include
increasing government spending during a recession and
decreasing government spending during an expansion.
However, growth-oriented policies, when timed improperly,
can cause the economy to overheat (growing at an
unsustainable rate) and subsequently cause a downturn.

CRS Resources
CRS In Focus IF10408, Introduction to U.S. Economy:
GDP and Economic Growth, by Mark P. Keightley and
Lida R. Weinstock

(Note: This In Focus was originally authored by Jeffrey
Stupak, former CRS Analyst in Macroeconomic Policy.)

Lida R. Weinstock, Analyst in Macroeconomic Policy

IF10411

https://crsreports.congress.gov

Introduction to U.S. Economy: The Business Cycle and Growth

Disclaimer
This document was prepared by the Congressional Research Service (CRS). CRS serves as nonpartisan shared staff to
congressional committees and Members of Congress. It operates solely at the behest of and under the direction of Congress.
Information in a CRS Report should not be relied upon for purposes other than public understanding of information that has
been provided by CRS to Members of Congress in connection with CRS’s institutional role. CRS Reports, as a work of the
United States Government, are not subject to copyright protection in the United States. Any CRS Report may be
reproduced and distributed in its entirety without permission from CRS. However, as a CRS Report may include
copyrighted images or material from a third party, you may need to obtain the permission of the copyright holder if you
wish to copy or otherwise use copyrighted material.

https://crsreports.congress.gov | IF10411 · VERSION 13 · UPDATED
